{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid721979\rsid1069857\rsid2569466\rsid5526431\rsid12347887\rsid14232920\rsid15033865\rsid15597842\rsid16547552}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords43362}{\nofchars247164}{\nofcharsws289947}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot12347887 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid15033865 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid15033865 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid15033865 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865 
   \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14232920 1902}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 

\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14232920 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid15033865  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14232920 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14232920 Office work - Harrods}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14232920 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid15033865\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid15033865 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Could I have your name?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 My full name? Very unusual one. Alfreda Elicia Holmes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I was born at 10, Peel Street, Kensington. Just off the Kensington - Kensington High Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What year was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 1902. 25th of May.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many years did you live in Peel Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not very many, as far as I r
emember I - I should think I was about three - when we left Peel Street. And - we went to live in Marylebone, where - where my brother was born.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - originally I had three. But - two of them died qu
ite young, I just had the one brother now. Who incidentally is Sherlock Holmes. Which was - you know, a brainwave of my father's on the way to the - have him registered, he'd forgotten the - one of the names my mother had mentioned and - he suddenly thoug
ht of it and - and he actually was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 hrist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ned - registered and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 C}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 hrist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was he younger or older than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh younger, I was the eldest. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 And the other two died quite young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were they brothers or sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Brothers. Brothers, I - I was the only girl. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How much younger than you was the brother that survived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Two years. Two years younger. And then - then the next one was six years younger. Then there was - another one after that, but he died q
uite - quite a baby, the one, and the other - other child - died from the result of an accident actually at four and a half. Which was very sad 'cos his was a lovely child.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How long did you live in Marylebone for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I think we - we lived there - 
as far as I - you know, from what my mother has told me - probably three or four years. And then we moved over and we came over to - Montpelier Place. And that's - when - my father had a - a sort of managing - a restaurant, which I believe is still in exi
s
tence, but probably you know, somebody different actually, and - we lived - we lived there for some time. Then we moved - a little further away - another place in Knightsbridge, called Luckland Street. Which is very fashionable neighbourhood now. And - an
d
 then we moved - directly into Chelsea. We had various - places in Chelsea we lived, which - you know, I've practically lived ever since. Well - ever since the - let's see, I remember my father going to the - to the - first world war in 19 - 1914. How he 
c
ame to be - to go - actually, he - he was - at Harrods at the time, you know, catering, and - they were sent when the first Canadian - people came over you see to Salisbury Plain you see, they wanted caterers for the Officer's Mess you see, so my father w
i
th the French chef who was the head chef, my father was under him - were sent to Salisbury - Plain you see. Well - the French chef used to - take a lot of time off and - one thing and another and my father was left to, you know, do these dinners for the v
a
rious officers. And - after some time - he - he was called - called forth you see, so he said - you know, he said to the batman or whoever it was, he said, well, I'm only the second, you know, he thought that as he was called for that there was something 
wrong you see, and he was, you know, going to sort of apologize. But to his surprise he said, oh no, we haven't sent - that - we sent because we're - we're very pleased, we like it, you see. Well - so he said, oh well, he said, w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 're - we're going to France
 very soon, the General told him, and, so he said he said, I want you to come as my chef. So he said, oh, but I'm not a soldier sir. So he said, oh well, we'll soon - alter that. So of course he had to join so he joined - he was in the First Canadian Divi
s
ion as chef to - each of the Canadian Generals in turn. He started with General Alderson, he went on to General Curry, and he finished up with General Bing, you know, the Bing boys as - as you hear of, you see, and he was actually out there, he had the 19
1
4 Star, he was actually out there in 1914. And of course the Canadians - almost like the Americans had - much more - than our people. You know, our - our Armies I mean and - and of course he was a sort of chef or cook, well he was chef then actually, but 
c
ook - he ranked cook you see, and of course - apparently in the Army all cooks are Sergeants you see. So of course my father started - Army life as a Sergeant which was very nice - financially for him you see. And he had a motorized kitchen. You see, whic
h
 went up to the - headquarters you know - for the General you know, headquarter staff you see, and of course they had things like - in those days which of course is nothing nowadays but in those days they used to have whole salmon, frozen and sent over in
 
containers you know from Canada you see. And he had all this and of course every time there was a big battle, or - you know, there had been a big battle, all the visiting French Generals and French - people or - Belgians or whatever they were at the time,
 
were all invited to the - to a dinner, you see, so really it - it made my father terribly busy. But he had - he had lots of - although he was - at General Headquarters and actually, I mean he wasn't a fighting man, but at one place, I think it was at Rhim
my, they had very bad gas attack and he was very badly gassed. Actually. And - then he - he went - went on and on, he stayed, you know, with - with - with the - Canad}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ans of course, and - and then - one day the - Duke of Windsor or - who was Prince of Wales then, he suddenly decided he wanted to see a bit - of - of life and of course he was a very venture some young -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was your father always a cook or chef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No. No, he wasn't. No, he was - actually he started out like his people were in the bui
lding trade. And - you know, he - he worked for his own people, and - you know - you know what it is when you work with your own people sometimes, it's not always - probably the best thing you see and I think that they were sort of - said they were teachi
n
g him - that sort of thing, but they gave him all the really - you know, sort of rotten jobs to do, dirty jobs to do you see. And - after some time he got a bit annoyed and - he sort of broke with them, and he found it very difficult to - to get a job - a
s
 he had to give his own people as reference, you see, and - any rate, so he - he - he sort of went into - you know, he went into - from then he sort of went into - I suppose he liked cooking, I don't know, and - he sort of went into it. But of course it w
a
s very - very - precarious sort of job, you know what I mean, it wasn't a - a sort of a - nine to six job or anything like that and of course there were certain times when, you know, you weren't wanted and - and you were - and then of course just about th
a
t time you see - there was so much foreign - foreigners coming over to England you see and of course everybody thought in those days that - either French or Italian - cookery was the thing. I mean, in restaurants and places like that you see it was consid
e
red that - I mean if you were English you just didn't know - anything about cooking you see. So that - very often he did - well I mean he'd do anything, I mean - you know, I mean he used to clean windows and - do any sort of odd jobs that were - that were
 
going, I mean, he was always - tried to do something. I mean, you - you had to. You had to in those days, there weren't - there wasn't anything for you if you were - you were not working. And of course that was why - that was why I was - so much with - wi
t
h the younger children - because - my mother, you see, she - when dad really had a bad turn and perhaps hadn't - couldn't get any work, not through any - fault of his own, my - my mother started and of course in those days that, you see, women - especiall
y
 women with a family, didn't go out to work, it wasn't one of the things you did. But you see my mother was always very much demand - in demand as a lady's maid - and she used to go abroad and of course she - it was wonderful of her in a way and - and - a
n
d that sort of thing. So that from the age of about seven - upwards, I mean, I - I used to - you know, sort of look to the children you see, and dad sometimes used to get a job where probably he did lunches, you see. Well then he'd be home at certain time
s
 you see, and of course in those days of course we had - I mean they're very much looked down on nowadays but they were wonderful things, we used to have an old range. A Larbert range and a coal fire which - I think's marvellous. And - you see - you could
 
always put in - I mean, you could put in a rice pudding - in those days, about nine in the morning. Well when - I used to take the children to school and bring them - bring them home from school, I mean, that was ready, he could put - he could put a - a s
o
rt of a casserole affair in you see. That would slow cook in that oven and that would be perfectly all right. I could - come in you see at twelve, he probably didn't get in 'til about two you see, could get in at twelve, give the children their - their lu
n
ch, wash up and clear up, take them back to school, fetch them from school, bring them back, by the time I got in dad had got home, had a bit of a rest - and perhaps he got our tea ready - very often I used to do it and you see and sometimes he'd say, oh 
w
ell I'm going out on me bike now, I'm going to have a - have a run on the bikes, you see, that was his only recreation and I think he did it - to get some air, after the - the heat of the - places you see, which was probably very good, but you see when we
 
were - we were young, we could never - never sort of save a - very much to go on holidays. So you see all the holidays that I can remember as a young child were day trips where dad used to go on first - you see, with the - a push car strapped on the back 
o
f the bike. Mum and us kids, I used to have one and mum used to have - one or two, whichever there were at the time, we used to go down for the day and do you know in those days you could go to Brighton for about half a crown return you know. Do you know 
t
hat? Well you could. And we used to get down - dad used to be there. You - 'course he'd - he'd gone some few hours before we had you see. And of course as we lived - very near, I mean, we - we could - quite easily catch a Victoria, which was the station y
o
u know for Brighton, and - we used to have the day there you see. Well the same procedure coming back, dad would see us into the train you see, and - then he'd - clear off and - you know, then - that - that was - that was our - our sort of holiday. But - 
w
e were always - we were always in - in the parks on fine days on Saturdays and things when we weren't at school. I mean I used to take the children up into the park. If it was a wet day we still went out. We used to go to the museum. And I remember the op
e
ning of the Victoria and Albert Museum you know. I do remember it, yes. I can't think - I must have been about eight I think. But I do remember it. And I think after the opening ceremony I think us kids were the first ones in. So on a wet day - we used to
 
go there, you see, we weren't very far away you see. And we used to go there and - and then of course if it was - a sort of showery day and it cleared up there was the museum gardens to go in and of course we used to - I used to show the children the - th
e
 various things, but of course the boys, what they really loved - was the Science Museum across the road, because they could press buttons and watch the trains move and what have you you know and that sort of thing, and then further on - sometimes - 'cos 
we'd be out for the day, I used to take sandwiches, a bottle of lemon}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
de you know and what have you, and - they used - the little one used to call it the dead zoo, you see, because he saw all the animals and they weren't alive you see. And - oh we used to s
pend - many a time in there. And - and of course they have - they have shows - film shows and that, they - well they used to have in those days you know. And although they were very very tiny you know and that sort of thing, but - you know I used to tell 
t
hem and - you know, they used to - sort of thing, and - and - but we were never any trouble to our parents you see, and of course we were never allowed to play in the streets, I mean, that was unheard of, I mean that wasn't a thing you did in those days. 
You see -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have a back garden or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
We had a garden, yes, we always had - you see, we always had a house you see. In those days it was - it was comparatively easy to get a house if you paid your rent you see. And - as - as I say yo
u had - you had your bit of garden. I mean, people say nowadays, oh however did they manage, they never had a bathroom and you never had these - sort of amenities you know, and you never had this that and the other, well you didn't, but then - I don't kno
w
 - I - I don't know that we wanted them in a way, I mean what you don't have you don't miss. And I - I think although I mean we weren't - you know - we - we - there was always something to do with children, I mean, you know, you always seem to be - doing 
s
omething or other, but - I think we were happier you know, we made our own - and you see we always had a - what we called a front room or a parlour in those days, and we always had a piano. You see. So that - you see, we - we used to make quite a lot of -
 our own amusements you see. And - well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did everybody play the piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well no, I never played but - I was always - very fond of singing. And - well, I've got here, I've got several diplomas, you know, things for singing when I was - younger. An
d - and of course we - well, I mean, we just enjoyed life like that. I mean, I - I'm not going to say that - you know, we - we didn't see things, we didn't think, oh we'd like this and we'd like that, but we knew jolly well we couldn't have them, so we - 
w
e just went without. But then you see - everything - you see, you got so much value for what you did get, you see. Now for instance there was a penny bank in those days. Don't know if you've ever heard of the penny bank have you? Well - they liked you to 
save up - to about a shilling. Well of course - my money was - my - spending money was three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pence a week, I was the eldest you see, and the boys were tuppence and a penny the youngest one you see. Well I used to do errands for people in between - looking a
fter the - you know, from school and that sort of thing, and I used to generally make up to about - you know, probably a shilling a week altogether you see with my own three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence you see and I used to save this money, and do you know, I can't understand i
t now - but I used to actually save money in those days, and even when I started work - and I mean I start - when I started work I - I - I started work in a bankers shop. Which was half past seven in the morning 'til half past seven at night, we had of co
urse - periods in between when we had, you know, we had - had to have breakfast of course at that time and we had - our dinnertime and what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
you. But do you know - I - I got - I think I got - twenty-five shillings a week - then, and do you know I - I - 
I used - I used to give my mother fifteen shillings a week. Because I was the eldest and - I was the only one earning. Used to give my mother fifteen shillings a week, and I used to have to buy certain things, mind you, we had - used to have our food. The
y
 used to give us our food in those days. And - but I used to save about five shillings a week, you know, now - now - when I think of it now, I - I just can't imagine. I don't think I really went without very much, I mean, I never had any luxuries mind you
.
 But of course - we didn't expect them. I mean, we knew we couldn't have them. I mean - but of course ice cream and things like that for children wasn't known. But I tell you what I do remember as a child. That was - we used to call him Ice Cream Jack, an
d
 he was an old Italian - with a barrow, and it used to be called Okey-Pokey. And it used to be a ha'penny you see. Well of course we often were so hard up that very often the one ha'porth or Okey-pokey used to have to go - from mouth to mouth as it were y
o
u see, but it was amazing you know how much - how much there was you know. And - you know, things like that. Now - and as regards sweets. I mean - well - the majority of sweets I mean you never - you never ever dreamt of - of spending - a penny - all at o
n
ce, in those days, because the sweets were four ounces a penny most of them you see. So - you - you probably spent a ha'penny and had a ha'penny back. And I remember once - one birthday of mine, somebody gave me a shilling. Well - I never had a shilling a
l
l at once to spend on, and they said to me, now you've got to spend it on - on what you want, you see. Well I think I told every child I knew - that I would treat them to sweets. Well - on the corner of - it - it's very very fashionable now, it's - it's a
 
very lovely house and I think somebody very very - well known has got it, and it was in Sheppell Place which is just off the Brompton Road, and there was two sisters, two old ladies, and they had this sweetie shop, and they were all in their glass jars yo
u
 know, all - it was really a lovely old shop you see, and of course I went in and so I said to them, it's my birthday today, and - I - I - and I've got these hoards of children, far too many that could get in - it was only a tiny shop you see. So I said, 
I
'll have - a ha'porth of those and a ha'porth of those, you see, and I hadn't realized really exactly what a shilling was you see, not then. And of course when I got you know, to about a dozen of these ha'porths of this and ha'porth of that, the old lady 
s
aid, what have - how much money have you got Freda, you see. So I said, oh I've got plenty of money, you see, and then I showed them this shilling. Well - finally I - I'd got so many children, you know, lined up, you know, about this sweet business, which
 - which I thought was going to be }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 inexhaustible}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
 sort of thing, that in the end, I was left with one little - one little packet of sweets, that was - that was my - that was my birthday, because the children had disappeared, but I never forgot that. And I al
ways - always felt now - now - what - now you see that's what a lot of children miss today. You see, now what - actually what can they get today for a shilling. I mean, I don't know. Bar of chocolate probably or - two of those - gob-stoppers we used to ca
ll them and - and - things like - but - but - but that - but they don't know the joy of - of - of - of getting a penny and getting a ha'penny or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 farthings change. You see, even a farthing in those days was - I mean - you know, you got a farthing, well
 you've got money you see. And a ha'penny, I mean, you - you'd literally got wealth if you spent a farthing, you had a farthing back. You see, so that - really and truly - I think in a way although - I mean - as I say, wages and - and - and everything. Bu
t then you see, you did get value - for - for what you had. And you see, as regards food - I mean - you see, everything was - was so reasonable. And then of course you see there was none of this pre-packed stuff, or anything of that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was there any tinned meat or anything around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Very very little. The only - the only thing that I remember tinned - when I was young, was tinned salmon which came out perhaps Christmas or somebody's birthday or something of that. And - and tinned pineapple. I remember
 that because - pineapple was one of the things, but - but - it used to be about three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pence ha'penny a tin. And the salmon would be about nine}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pence a tin. You see. But - but they were definite luxuries, I mean, they were things that - that - that you jus
t wouldn't have. But then you see, everybody cooked in those days. Everybody - you see I mean, of course I was lucky as I say my father - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who did the cooking in your house, your father or your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well mother wasn't a - well, when 
I say she wasn't a very good cook - she didn't like cooking. Now I love cooking. I - I mean myself, you know, but - but - my mother could let my father do much cooking because he was too extravagant. You see, he never had to - I mean, he'd have barrels of
 
eggs, pounds of butter, he cooked everything with butter. Well, we - we - we couldn't - we couldn't - couldn't afford that. Best butter in those days was one and tuppence a pound I remember. And - of course margarine had - had just recently come on the ma
r
ket and of course we used to have to have it. But what I do remember - I remember dripping. And it was wonderful. And in - in the early days you know before they made - I don't know when it came out, I think it came out about 1912, there was a ruling that
 
- oh about children not going into public house you see. Well, in those days all the - little public houses round about, they always - always gave very good luncheons, which some of them do nowadays. But I mean it was a well known thing and I mean - a wor
k
ing man, if he was working away from home, would invariably go in a pub because he got a good meal. I think it was a shilling, but he got roast and - two vegetables and what have you. Yes, I think that was the - you know, the standard sort of price. Well 
o
bviously, in these places they had to have - probably three joints on, they'd probably have beef, lamb and pork, in season, you know, they'd have at least three things. Well they used to get lots and lots of dripping. We used to go with a basin, for this 
dripping. We were allowed - children were allowed to go into the pubs in those days, you know, in - you know, before the - and we used to go and it used to be three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence a pound. And I used to get three or four pounds at a time, and we used to get it in - 
get it, used to run it down and then at the bottom there'd be this beautiful jelly. And I sat in front - I've sat in front with a whole pile of - of bread, 'cos there was no sliced - bread in those days you know, but whole pile of bread, sliced it up and 
-
 and - and had a - a fork, and you know I think there's nothing like the taste of toast - from a fire, a real fire, with dripping on it. And it's - it's one of the - it was one of our - our - our delights. We - we didn't want cake if we could have bread a
n
d dripping. And - and that's what we - but you see, they was - it was all the goodness, it was all - it - it was all wonderful you know. So that I mean - very cheaply you could - and then in - in those days they were the little - always the little corner 
shops, on every corner. Then if you weren't very well off, you know, or you hadn't got very much that week, well instead of buying a pot of jam you could go with a basin, you could get a pennyworth of jam. Or treacle. Or syrup.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where would you do the shopping, around the Knightsbridge area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, yes, yes, the little shops about, they're made into houses now, but the little shops - and - and it was wonderful what you could get. The same as if on Mondays now we always reckoned Sunday to have a j
oint in those days, everybody had a joint you got a joint for about two shillings, you know. And - on Mondays it was always washing day, and it was a cold meat day, with mashed potatoes and pickles. Well the same thing applied, you didn't want to buy a ja
r of pickles, that was always - much more expensive, about sixpence or so, you took a basin.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  You could get a pennyworth of P}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ic}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
illy, pennyworth of red cabbage or what have you. And it was enough you know, for the meal for - four or five of you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were there any markets round here or was it all shops?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Yes, there was a market, it's - it - well there - there is a - very slight remnant of it now, in what is now called Draycott Avenue. It used to be called Marlborough Road. And that was a street market
 in those days. And on a Saturday night if you went down there, 'cos the shops used to open very very late, and I - I thought it was marvellous, 'cos I was always - had to go to bad fairly early, but if - if mum hadn't got very much money at the end of th
e
 week, she'd say to me, I know what we'll do. We'll - your father can be in - with the - boys. We'll go down about ten o'clock, we'll go down to Marlborough Road and we'll probably get a joint, and do you know, I remember one Christmas when - unfortunatel
y
 we hadn't - things hadn't been very good and - I remember getting - my mother getting a turkey for half a crown. On Christmas Eve about half past ten, you know, because - you just - they just wanted to get rid of it you know sort of thing, nothing the ma
tter with it, but - it was just that - they wanted to get rid of it you know and - and we - and of course we had this turkey you know I mean, we had it all the week of course naturally.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you have many people round on Christmas Day or would you go out on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - no, Christmas - Christmas was always a very - a very strong - family affair. Well - we used to have - any relatives that happened to be near would probably look in, and then as I say there - there wouldn't be anything ela
borate, because my people - neither of them drank, you see, they weren't drinkers. But - we-d have - you know, sing-songs, which everybody - sort of entered in and all my mother's people were musical you see, and - we'd enter into that and then it would b
e
 - it would be sandwiches, I mean, if you had turkey well then there'd be turkey sandwiches, what have you. And then they usually finished up the - the time with - they were very fond of playing cards. Whist and - what have you you know and that sort of t
h
ing. And - and then that used to - used to go on and of course the men used to have their smokes and that and of course - I used to put the children to bed and of course - get myself to bed and then of course - I don't remember, but - we never had very - 
v
ery hectic times, but we always used to try to have - have a Christmas tree. Which we also got very cheaply you know. And - there used to be also a penny bazaar in the Brompton Road. It is now the - the - the place where they had the penny bazaar is now t
h
e International Stores. Now. Yes. Well opposite there, I don't know if you noticed, there's a - archway. Well through there, that was where we lived, that comes into the street, you should go round there sometimes, it's - it's most interesting. It's very 
o
ld. Well we used to go to this penny bazaar. Well I mean - for about a shilling - I mean, you - you could - festoon the tree - literally you see. Some of the things were two a penny, you see, some of the smaller things you see, and then you see, what we -
 
we did, on - on the tree would be - some - one item - particularly for each child - was there you see out of this penny bazaar. But you never reckoned to spend more than half a crown on it, well you hadn't got it so you couldn't. But - you see - people sa
y
 oh you know - children were deprived and that. They weren't, because, I mean, we - we did have - we did have something, and I mean we thought it was - it was wonderful, you know. And - and - but of course more often, you know, especially as we got - got 
older, it would be that you had some new shoes or a new - you know - frock or what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
you you see, but of course I mean no children think of that as a - as a Christmas present - really did they. I mean - but - but of course - you see, that - that was they
 way of things. When - when - when you got older, I mean you didn't have a toy, you didn't - you didn't want a toy. In any case I mean I never had time to play with - with toys when I was younger because I mean I always had the - the boys to look to you s
ee, so that -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would the boys ever help you in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh no, they weren't expected to. You see, that was - that was the old - which I think was rather a shame, because that was the old tradition, boys weren't supposed to do anything you see. It
 was always the girls you see, it was the girls of the of the family, that's why - it - it could have been very hard for - when you were the eldest and you were a girl, you see, because - you were just expected - oh no, the boys weren't expected to do any
thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 They didn't do anything around the house like cleaning up or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - not really. No, not really. I mean - I - we used to - get them to do little chores like - gradually, as they got older, cleaning their own shoes and what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 yo
u you know. But - my father was generally the - shoe cleaner of the family we used to put our shoes out you know and - and they were cleaned. And of course in those days of course - shoes were - were mended and of course - the boys used to have things - I
 don't know whether you've heard of them, have you heard of Blakey's? No, well they were things that they would put on boy's shoes you know to save a lot of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 scuffing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  and - yes, metal things to - to - you know - sort of prolong the life of the shoes of cours
e, but of course like everything else I mean - especially as they were growing they wore out at - certain times, and they just had to have new ones, and - you know, that was it you know. And of course it was often a toss up, you know, whether you had - th
i
s, that and the other or whether the boys had new shoes, well - you'd always settle because mother made most of my things, so it was always settled the time I was due for a new frock or a new something or other, you know, oh well, the boys wanted shoes an
d of course shoes were the things mother couldn't make you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 But she made most of the other things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh she made - made everything, yes, she used to make the boys little knickers and - and jerseys and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 you. And - and of course - wel
l I mean, things were done like that in those days and of course people mended things where if they - if they got torn. Well you see nowadays they're inclined to throw them away I think. You know, I - you see, it was - it was a different era you see, you 
see - necessity made you - made you do certain things. But I - I don't think we were - we were under - privileged in any way, I mean, I - I can never remember going hungry. I never had - as I say, we never had - you know - sort of luxuries - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say you had a joint every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about during the rest of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh well we - we had a lot of stews. Great believer in stews. And meat puddings. Bacon puddings I remember - my mother getting. And of course, the - the big s
hops the local shops were wonderful. You see, us children used to get up about half past six or seven in the morning, and we used to go off - along the Brompton Road, and you see, in those days no - no bakers - self respecting baker ever sold bread - from
 
one day to another, it was always fresh bread you see. So you got the yesterdays bread which was - incidentally very much better for you - but you got yesterdays bread - very very cheap you see. Oh yes. Yes. Well we used to get that. Well we used to have 
to go early in the morning, used to take either a pillowcase or a very huge bag you see, and we used to go and we used to get three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pennyworth of bread, you see, and very often they'd slip in a few rolls, you see. Well then we used to go further along - to Coopers, which is now Fine Fare, and we used to there. And - we used to get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pennyworth of meat pieces. Scraps of - mutton, you know - to - for stews, you know, or beef sometimes it used to be. And - fish. Fish quite - quite cheap also from the same
. And then we used to go round to the fruit department, used to say, have you got any specks? Well - they were - they were - fruit that wasn't in its - you know, perhaps somebody had knocked it over and that sort of thing, there's a bruise on it or someth
i
ng of that you see. Well for a penny you'd get, you know, quite enough to do - so that - I mean, you could go home, you - you'd go out with probably two shillings you see and you'd reckon to bring some of that back. And you come back with bread, meat, fis
h - and - and ; apples or what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
you you know, fruit of some kind you see. So you had practically enough every day - you know - for about a shilling or one and six, you know, and - and good - and good stuff at that you see. Well then there used to be - a
 - a sort of costermonger used to come round twice a week, we used to call him old Ginger and he had a donkey, 'cos we all used to feed this donkey so much that in the end it got so fat it could hardly - you know - get the - thing along. But - for - for -
 for tuppence, we - my mother - used to always send me of course - for tuppence you reckoned to get - enough - what they called - pot herbs, like turnips, carrots, onions, what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
you, for tuppence you reckoned you got enough - for - near enough the week.
 Well then if you wanted a cabbage - a decent size cabbage you know for a family you know to do perhaps twice you see, another tuppence you see. And potatoes used to be about - four p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 
ound for tuppence I think or som}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ething of that kind. You see, so that I m
ean - things were very very reasonable, and you could have a - and - and they were good, I mean, if they didn't you see the people in those days, I mean, they'd soon - they'd soon have told Old Ginger off if he - if he was trying to sell any rough stuff, 
and he wouldn't dare, not even with us children because we knew - how to shop you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever grow any of your own vegetables in the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No, we didn't - we didn't because mother wanted us all to have a little patch. But one of my little brothers, I must tell you, I had p
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
rsevered with little packets of seed you know and - I'd got them coming up you see and - I bought - bought them each a packet you see and this one little boy you see, so he went out you see, and I - I showed him how
 to put them in you see, and of course mine had been in for some time you see and mine were coming up little shoots were coming and - and things and eventually flowers of course. So - every morning he used to go out and he used to say - used to kneel down
,
 he used to say, there's nothing coming up. There's nothing coming up. I said, oh you'll have to wait - we'll have to wait a bit Georgie, you know, it won't be - they won't be just yet. Well one day I'd got - oh quite an array of blooms on my patch of gar
d
en you see - and - I was very pleased about it, any rate I was doing some chores in - in the house, and - this young one was missing, he was about two and a half at the time. And - mother said, what on earth is - is he doing? She said, you'd better go and
 
have a look, she said, he's in the garden you see. So I said, oh he's watching the seeds come up, I said, he - he - if that's all he's doing he'll wait a long time, they won't be up for some weeks. Well when I went out I could have cried. There - was all 
m
y - blooms - sitting on the top of his little bit of garden. He said, they've come up. They've come up. Of course he knew he was very naughty and of course we had to - we had to sort of convince him that it was wrong in case he ever went into anybody's ga
r
den, you know, and did it. But - you know, you - you just couldn't hit them really. You know, it was - it was just one - I - I - I don't think - you know, our parents, we were very - very seldom hit. I mean we had to be very very naughty to get a - I mean
,
 I don't say there weren't - we weren't naughty sometimes and mischievous but - I mean, we had to be - really do something really - really bad you know. And - and - and another thing I remember once - when - we were in the museum - mind he was a very beau
t
iful child, I think I've shown you the photograph of him. And everybody used to remark, he had most beautiful - golden hair you see which curled naturally you see. And - it wasn't much good keeping a cap on it because it was springy, you know, springy cur
l
s. And - one day we were - in the museum and - wandering round you know, we'd been round for some time, and - there were - two Americans, lady and a gentleman, coming through you see. So they - they remarked you know, the gentleman first remarked and so s
h
e said, oh yes, hadn't he got - you know, beautiful hair. And he was used to - you know, people saying this you see. So - so she said, is that - is that one of your little brothers, you see. So I said, yes, the other one - I'd got two of them with me then
,
 the other one had wandered off onto a case or something. So - so she said, oh, she said, and have you - have you got any sisters? So I said, oh no, I haven't got any sisters, I'm - the only girl you see. So - anyway after a lot of talking, you know, and 
-
 and one thing and another, she said, how old is he? So I said, well he's two and a half. And he was a very big child, he was twelve pound ten when he was born, which was enormous. My mother was a very small person. Much smaller than me. And - he - he was
 
really a lovely child. So - any rate - after he'd gone - this lady - turned round, and - she put a half a crown in - in - this child's - little hand you see. So of course we'd always been told we must never, you know, like take money and things like that 
y
ou see. So I said, oh - you know. So she said. Oh yes, she said, you - you - now you must buy - buy something, she said, you want, you know. Any rate - off they went you see. Oh, so - when they'd gone you see, he still clutched this so I said, now give me
 
the money Georgie. So he said, the lady said I was - you was to spend it on us, you see. So I said, yes, I will, but give it me - for now, I thought - a whole half a crown, I wasn't - just going to spend on them anyway. So - then he looked at me, and he a
l
ways thought you know, I was - you know, everything I said was - you know, was it you see. And - so he said, you told a story. So I said, told a story? Why? He says, you told that lady you hadn't got any sisters. I said, well I haven't got any sisters. An
d
 you said you'd got two brothers. He said. I've only got one brother. You see. So I said, yes, I know. But I said, you've got a sister. So he said, well I can't have a sister if you haven't got a sister. You see, that was his way of reasoning. Well, yes, 
well any rate, I bought - you know, about two}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
penn'orth of sweets or what have you for we got home, you see, I changed the half a crown. And I gave two shillings of it back - to mother you see. 'Cos I thought well naturally she could - used it much better t
han us and we'd had these sweets you see which were a bonus for us you see. So - he couldn't contain himself any longer so he said - mum, our Freda tells - tells stories. So - good gracious, does she, whatever has she done? So of course he repeated this. 
A
nd you know, it was a long long time before we could make - so he said, well, he said, she has got a sister, she's got her. She's got herself you see. And - oh it was a long time before we could make that child, you know. Well - my mother was very ill som
e
time after that and I - I first started - you see, I used to have to step away from school. Well in those days you had what they called the - board school man come round you see, you know. So I said, well, I said, I can't - I can't come to school because 
t
hese children are too young. So this very child - he actually was accepted at school when he was two and a half. Well he died at four and a half, well he - you know. So he had two years of schooling. And do you know, that - when he went to school that chi
l
d could write his name, he could draw, he could - you know, I - I think he would have been a very very intelligent child you know if he'd have lived. But of course you see - you know, when you've got others in the same - the family to help and that sort o
f
 thing, you see, so the - the - the headmistress, it was only a small school as I tell you - she accepted us because - otherwise it meant me - stopping away from school you see because in those days you never had any help - if - if you had illness, or, yo
u
 know, you had your - there was nobody - nobody did anything you see. And of course - my father couldn't always - sometimes he could be home 'cos sometimes he did dinners at night you see, but then - he couldn't choose what he was going to do, he had to d
o
 what - he could do sort of thing you see. So that very often you see, if he was - if he was doing dinners at night it was all right because he could be in in the day and he could help and he would - look to the children you see, but you see, you couldn't
 
guarantee that you see, so that that's why I - I - you know, I stopped away from school. But only for a little while because you know they were so insistent, but any way I left school when I was fourteen, and - and - and - and got a job. You see because I
 had to, as I say I was the eldest, well of course by that time my father was in France you see. And - of course the war was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he send money back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, oh yes, 'cos my mother got an allowance you see. From - from Canada you see. And - you
 know, we weren't - we weren't - quite so badly off, but at the same time it was a - long time before the boys - you know, sort of - did anything you see. And - and - and that's how it was but - I don't know, I mean, I don't that I've - I've - I've regret
t
ed it really you know. There - there were times when, you know, I used to have other girlfriends, you know, would say, oh we're going out tonight, going to a dance or we're going to something you know. Are you coming? I said, oh well, I can't - you know I
 
can't come, you know, I've - got to look after the - you know, and - once now and again I'd probably felt, well you know - it - it's a shame I can't go. Oh but now I must tell you something that might interest you, do you know - do you know the - that cin
ema in Drayton Gardens. The Barons. The Paris Pullman now, it used to be called the Boton cinema you see. Well on a Saturday morning, they did - they did a marvellous thing. From ten o'clock 'til twelve - they used to have a children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 s - do, and you could get in for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence. And - many a Saturday morning when I'd saved up - I'd take - the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of things would they have on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh cowboys of course, cowboys and Indians and things like that and somebody playing the piano you know. What}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12347887\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
you you see. And of course whenever the - whenever the - cowboys looked like - you know, we used to sort of - shout out you see. We were quite convinced that - it was because they could hear us through the screen, that that's why they - that's why t
hey moved quickly you see, and - and of course the cowboys always won of course, I mean the Indian spears, you know, never - never sort of - hit them properly you know. And - and - but of course we used to walk - we used to walk from - where we were livin
g then, in Knightsbridge, to - you know, so it didn't cost us anything in bus fares you see. And - I used to try and contrive to get, you know, a little bag of sweets to have in between, 'cos it was typically a children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 s do you know, and you had to be doing something you know, during the time. But that was the result of our - that was - that was our - our main - }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 and - and every Christmas - I r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
emember - my mother always used to take us to the Chelsea Palace here, that is now - it's this big - huge building y
ou know, the Granada people had it, and - we used to go to pantomime. We used to go up in the gods, we used to love it. That also used to be three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence in those days, most things used to be about three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pence you know, in those days. But - we - we used to 
absolutely - you know, it was absolutely us, you know, we absolutely enjoyed it 'cos we thought nothing of mounting all the hundreds of stairs you know, that - that to kids I mean was - was - was just it. And - coming back, on the way back, in - in the Ki
n
gs Road, very very near - it's now - well they're - they're re-doing it, it's now the new - other cinema, you know, the - not the Essoldo, the - what do you - all it? No, not the Classic. The - other - well they're - they're re-doing it now, and - that wa
s a fish and ship shop. And we used to go in there. And - for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
pence, a tuppenny piece of fish and a pennyworth of chips. You had a nice fish supper, on your}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
way back. No that - that to us, that was - not exactly luxury but - you know, we - we were wel
l off, we'd been - we've been to the pantomime, and we've had a fish and - a fish and chip supper. We used to go first house you see. Except when they were doing a matinee. We went first}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 house which was over about eight o'clock. And into this fish shop com
ing home. And we really thought, you know, in those days we really thought - we used to say to other kids, been to the pantomime. Went and had fish and chips. You know. And we - that - that really to us, that was - that was it you see. Now - probably - pr
obably didn't cost half a crown for the lot of us, you know. And - and - and that - and that gave so much pleasure and then of course all the rest of the -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father go to this as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh no. No. No. It was generally mum. No. No, dad - dad -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You were telling me about your father not going to the pantomime?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 YES.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would he ever take you out anywhere on his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well he would - he would have done, but you see it wasn't necessary you see 'cos I filled that role you see, I 
always - you see, the children were out every day. You see, I mean - either going backwards and forwards to school when - such times when they went to school, and - and of course Saturdays I mean, it was regular, I mean, it was - it was - it was the - the
 park for us I mean. And of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 There are lots of parks around here as well you can choose from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
We used to go to Hyde Park. Oh that was our park. And of course when we'd get a bit ambitious went on to Kensington Gardens, you know, through H
yde Park into Kensington Gardens. But we used to have a certain spot, we used to go on what they called the first green you see, and of course immediately - it was ever so funny you know, mother always said it cost you much more when you children go out, 
'
cos we always comeback to lunch, but you see I used to ge ages cutting these piles of bread and jam sandwiches and what have you you know, and - and bottles of pop, we used to make it with - with lemonade powder, you could buy it by the pound you know in 
t
hose days. Well you - you buy it by the quarter you know. About tuppence a quarter I think, you could make quarts of it you know with this - stuff you see. And of course we used to go out and of course I was the one that had to carry the bags you know and
 
hold onto the kids you know but of course - in those days you see you didn't have these traffic crossings, but what I think was much nicer you always had the policeman. You see, and of course we were always taught to - never to try and cross any - any roa
d
, you know - without a policeman you see, and of course he used to come and of course he used to come across the road and you could - it didn't matter - sometimes I had two or three other kids - tacked onto me as well, you know, other peoples children you
 
know, 'cos I didn't mind having - how many I took you see. And of course we used to plonk for the first green, well the boys - you know, they all used to sit down and they'd say, oh - I'm hungrey. They've probably not long had their breakfast but still - 
y
ou see, that was - that was the way we were you see. Well then - I used to get them - get them into a way that I could train them, I used to say, now - I used to have to go home for reinforcements you see, you see, 'cos I said, now, I said, you're not to 
s
peak to anybody, you know, if anybody - comes up, you're not to speak to them, only just say good morning or something like that, you're not to - you know, and you're not to move, you see. But - which of course they didn't you see, so I knew that I would 
find them there, and of course I used to go back for another load of sandwiches and what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 you you see, and - and of course we used to stay out 'til dinnertime you see. Well then we come back and we'd have our dinner.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What time would that be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh about one o'clock usually, dinnertime. And then - we'd - we'd come and - well - perhaps the little ones would have a sleep in the afternoon you see. Well then about three o'clock off we'd go again, you see, 'til about six you see. Well then we'd come h
ome and we'd sort of have a - sort of a high tea you know, and - as I say, eggs and everything was very cheap in those days you see so you could - generally have an egg for tea you see. And - and then of course bath and go to bed and - you know, put them 
to bed you see, went to bed according to the age, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was Saturday night bath}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Oh yes, we had a - had a - and then of course we had - of course as I say we had no bathroom but of course we never went dirty as far as I can ever rem
ember. As a matter of fact - the boys were - were bathed nearly every day. But we had - we had an old co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
per you know, in those days, I mean, they can have their washing machines nowadays but - those old coppers did a great job you know, and - and of cours
e you - you could heat the water, you see, underneath - this copper you see, you'd heat - heat it, and get hot water you see, and of course we used to go out - into this place and there was the big bath you see, and - you know, we literally had a bath as 
it were you know, and of course went to bed and - and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 you you see, that was - you know, that was it. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was there any regular time you had to be in bed by?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well according to the ages you see, when they were very young half past si
x you see. Then it got to seven and then, you know, then there used to be grumbles you know, from the one that's - like, you know, one next to me, you know, oh I didn't ought to go to bed the same as the kids, you see, sort of thing. And then it got to - 
b
ut - I - I think I was always in bed about eight. I think that was about the limit you know, unless I was - and - I know I was very impressed - the first time I ever went to watch night service, I couldn't understand why everybody was out at church you kn
o
w, the middle of the night, 'cos mother took me you see 'cos dad was home you see, and - of course he could - you know, I mean he was in - well the - the - children were never left you see, the - you know the youngsters were never left, you see, we were n
e
ver left you see, that is - that is the great pity at home now with children I think, you see - they - they - they've much more freedom in lots of way I mean and - and you know, - they're not so obedient probably and all that sort of thing, but you see, t
h
ey don't have the - they don't have the same affection, and they don't have the same - you see, in those days nobody - nobody would ever think of - about a babysitter I mean - I mean such things weren't known, I mean it was always - it was always the elde
s
t - the eldest person in the - eldest one in the family be it boy or girl, wasn't it, that - that - that did the job you see, you didn't have babysitters you see, and at such times as - you know, there was a funeral on or anything and the family went, whe
re your mother and father both had to go well then of course you - you know - you fell in the gap you know, that's about the only the day that I had - took off from school or anything like that was - you know, to - to be there for that reason you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would your father and mother go out very much together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, not really. Because - my mother of course as I told you was very very fond of singing. And - she was usually in some - she had been to Glynbourne. She had sang at Glynbourne, and - of course
 she was in - like very big choirs and that sort of thing, so of course - and of course my father wasn't at all musical, but they never quarre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 led about things, my mother wasn't interested in - in cycling. And - they went their own ways, but - I mean they 
never - they - you know, they - they - I can never remember as a child - very happy childhood, you know, I mean I think if there - if there ever was anything it was probably about us children you know, dad - dad didn't have a very happy childhood, and he 
w
as inclined to be - mother thought a bit too lenient, which - you know what I mean, he was a bit - no, he - he wanted - you know, and he was a bit too - you know, and he was - he would be more inclined, you know, if - if one of the boys had really been - 
y
ou know, really naughty or - you know, really told fibs or anything like that you know, I mean - mother would be - be inclined to say, well - you know, they must be told - that they must have a smack or something. Used to say, dad, well you must do someth
ing about it, you know. But - I - I don't - don't think my father could ever - ever do that sort of thing, you know, he was too much the other - the other way really you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would your mother ever hit you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, very very rarely. I was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How would they punish you if you'd done small things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - you know - mother might say - oh well you shan't go so and so, you know, if I'd made up me mind to something, something like that, but - it was - well it was so seldom I can - I can 
very very rarely - remember you know. I - I think - I - I don't think I was a bad child really, from what I can - what I can hear you know. And - I mean there were times probably when I - I felt like saying, oh I don't want to do that, why should I, you k
n
ow, and of course - different girls used to say to me, come so and so, you know, when I got to about twelve or thirteen you know, the age when you feel, you know, you're, you know, and - they used to say they were going so and so, and they would say, well
 
why can't you come? I used to say, oh well, you know, looking after those kids, you know, and - of course all these girls you see they were all from families but you see they were probably - the second or the third one in a big family, you see, they weren
'
t the eldest one you see, and they couldn't understand why I - sort of - stuck it sort of thing you know. But - I didn't feel I was being deprived you know. Mother had told me, you know, in later years, you know, she says, sometimes, you know, she - she's
 
felt, you know, that it wasn't quite fair, you know, that I had to - give up such a lot you know, but she said, of course, she said, you were a child that, you know, you didn't complain and I suppose we - you know, it was sort of circumstances you know. I
 expect now and again - I sort of - you know, I felt a little bit rebellious and I thought, well why should I do it you know, and oh blow the kids or something, but - not for very long you know, I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I suppose you'd be the link if your father wasn't sure what hours he was working and your mother wan't sure what she'd be doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Yes, yes. No, no, exactly. And of course in those days you see if you - if you went out to work for the day I mean you really went for the day you know. And - I mean it was really hard - going you know. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Your mother wasn't working all through the years was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh no, no, no, no, no. No, but you see, a lot of - the ladies that she knew, of course were getting elderly then, and they couldn't sort of - I don
't know, they didn't like the foreign maids, you see, they liked my mother, and they liked the way that she carried on. And of course - well she - she travel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ed round, she was with the Fleet Street choir you know for some time, and at seventy - my age or y
ou know, she went over and - she did - did a lot of concerts with them. They were away six weeks. Well of course I couldn't - I couldn't belong to it 'cos I couldn't leave work for six weeks you see. And - they went to Denmark, Norway, Sweden, all the Sca
n
dinavian countries you see, and they played the various music like Holst or what have you in the various cities and had a marvellous time you know. But of course you see she was - she was - well of course they - they - we were older then you know when she
 
was seventy obviously - but - she was able to do that you see, now - that's where my father I think was very good you see. I mean, he didn't say, oh no, I'm not going to have you - clear off for six weeks, you see, because I looked after dad see. You see,
 
I mean I went to work but I mean I - I sort of looked after him in between, I mean he could do a certain amount himself but - I sort of got things and - and looked after him and of course dad - dad never worried you see and of course - you know, he - he u
s
ed to say to me - I'd - I - I'm going off on - on me bike, I'm going so and so you see, and - but you see - I but the only difference with mother and I you see, mother used to say, oh well, if he likes to go off, let him go off, he ought to know by now, y
o
u know what it means. But you see I used to worry when - you know, if - if it got a bit late and - and nothing happened. Because it was nothing for - a policeman to come and say, you know, there's been an accident and he's in the cottage hospital or somet
h
ing or other somewhere you know, and - and then of course, they'd say to me, oh well, you know, if you like to get through you know, then I'd get through and then - the Matronwould say, oh - oh yes, oh yes, he's a dear old gentleman, you know, and I used 
t
o tell mother and she used to say well I've got a lot of other words for him you see, because - you see, dad didn't realize he would - he would be worrying you you see, he knew it didn't worry mother. But he never - he never realized that he worried me yo
u
 see, but - I never got over that business of - of sort of worrying, mother used to say well don't be so silly - he - he - he's old enough, he's been doing it for years now, she said, if he likes to go off like that and - you know, if he gets in a - well 
h
e gets in an accident you see. But of course I used to worry about it. But - he was very silly - 'cos as he told me he always came out all right and of course he did you see. And strangely enough it was hardly ever his fault, it was generally a lorry or s
o
mething that had run into him you know. And once he made us very cross because - I think he would have had a very good chance - it was on the Great West Road, and he actually had witnesses - there, but he - he said - he said, oh well, he said, I looked up
,
 and he said, I could see he was a young chap, he said, and I thought, oh well - you know, if - he might get in a row with his firm and he might do this - although the fellow was in the wrong. He said, and I thought, well I - I'm an old chap and he - I've
 
had a good - life and that and he said, so he said, I - I said to him, oh well, I think it was my fault. I bet that lorry drive give a sigh of relief. And - he - and - and yet there was - what do you call it, one of these cafes, you know, on the road ther
e
, yes, transport place, and there was somebody there actually that saw it, and they said it definitely wasn't my father's fault you see. But - you see what we couldn't - make my father understand, this lorry driver was driving for a - probably some big fi
r
m, it wouldn't be him, you see, that - yes, but that's what - you see, all my father could think of was - you know, well he's a young man, he's probably got - you know, children. Well he probably had - anyway - and - but you see he couldn't think that - y
o
u know, that it was the firm he was fighting and not the - you know. So of course he never ever got any compensation you see. Which - 'course my - my - my mother - my mother was very indignant about you see. But of course he - he'd - he'd had so many - we
eks in - oh he'd had smashed ribs, he'd had all sorts of things. But he always - marvel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ously got over them you see. And the minute he was - you know, felt all right, he used to say, oh well, I - I'll go home now. They said, oh well-, no, you'll have to hav
e so much more rest. Oh no, I don't want rest, I've got - I've got a home of me own, I've got a bed of me own, I - got a wife and daughter you know, always used to put this in, so - so they said yes, but you - wife and daughter can't look after you if you
're ill, you see, but - oh - oh no, he couldn't - he couldn't bear staying in, he only stayed in - I mean obviously when he was in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 an oxygen tent and various things of that kind well I mean we couldn't - pump oxygen into him could we and things. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he have many accidents when you were a little girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, not very many. I can't remember him ever being ill, no, not having an illness. No, I never remember - I remember my mother being ill several times of course, she was very ill - at times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 That was when you used to have to stay at home from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes. Yes. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have a nurse or anybody in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well you didn't in those days, you didn't - our doctor was - you know, very kind in lots of ways you know. And - and I 
- I think I must have been a little bit of a precocious child because - I remember once going down to the surgery, and it was - just before the panel business came out you know and - so the - the woman in charge there you see, the doctor was out, it was -
 
wasn't the surgery time you see, so I said, oh, I said, I wanted someone to come and see my mother, you see. So she said, well, she said - is she - is your mother - a private patient or a - or a panel patient? So I said, oh no, I don't think she - 'cos pr
i
vate you know conjured up money to me you see, and of course I'd never heard of panel, I didn't know what it meant then you see, so I said, I don't think she's panel. I said, I think she must be public. So of course when the doctor came you see - so - 'co
s
 he came, so he says - oh hello, he said to mother. And - so he said, I've come to see the public patient, you see. So mother said, what? So he said, yes, he said, he said, I roared when the receptionist told me he said, he said, I knew it was Freda - 'co
s
 he knew me you see, he said, I knew it was her, he said. So mum said, well, she said, doctor, she said, it's like this - 'cos in those days you had to pay when you had a doctor, you know, people like my mother of course, and - I think it was half a crown
 
a visit, something like that, but still it still meant money to me you see. Ah yes, ah yes, but I mean to have a doctor visit you see, you know - when you weren't what they call on the panel you know. And - and of course - we had a good laugh, 'cos he was
 
Scottish, you know, and - we had a good laugh over it and oh often afterwards he - he used to tease me and he used to say, oh well, you're my public patient you see. But I thought public sounded as if you know you didn't have to pay too much, and that sou
nded about right to me. Yes. Well - you know, it was funny what you do as kids isn't it really but still -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you remember one of your brothers being born, what happened, what arrangements were made then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, of course in these days you ha
d a midwife you see. You had a midwife. You see. And - she came in and - well generally everything was fore or less ready and then - then the doctor just came. But of course - with - with that - that one that was twelve - that - that was the only time my 
m
other ever went into hospital. You see, it was what they called a breach birth you see which - of course was very difficult, and they - they - they found it - they - they worried her because they said - she'd have to have two doctors you see and of course
 the thought of two doctors in those days was - was a - terrible expense, so she said, oh I can't afford - so one of the ladies that she knew when she heard about it - she - she gave her a letter, she was a Governor or something - at the - Westminst}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 er - I think it was the Westmin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ster hospital, and she gave her this letter and of course mother was in there, but of course - mother was in there - for a long time, and she was in there after he was born, because - you know, there was a lot of complications you se
e. 'Cos my mother was only about seven stone something. You see, and this baby was twelve pound ten. And they had a very - he was the biggest baby that they could remember there for so many years. And do you know, when she was - in St Stephens hospital ju
s
t before she died, she was - turned ninety then - you see, and when they were examining her you see they said, oh I suppose you've never had any children? So mother said, you - you - you have another examination, you see. So she said, I've had five altoge
t
her you see. So - any rate when they examined further of course they - you know, they realized you see. So they said, oh I suppose they were - you know, they were very delicate and small children you see. So mother said, well I don't know what you call sm
a
ll. I was the only small one I think you know but then I was a seven months baby so - you know - I was considered - you know - but - so mother said, well I had one that was twelve - well, I think they thought that she was romancing you see, you see, so mo
t
her said, yes, and I'll tell you when he was born and I'll tell you where he was born. So evidently - this - specialist that was going round you see that was very interested, any rate he - he took the trouble to ring them up. And evidently they'd got docu
m
ents - way back you know, so - when - they called the baby Gluff they called him you know before he was born, you know, when he was born, so - when he came round the next time to see my mother, so he said, oh, he said-, we found out about Goliath. So mum 
said, oh, she said, so you did ring up, she said, you did find out, she said. So he said, yes, he said, he said must have been a marvel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ous, you know, mother said yes he really was a wonderful - child. So he said, well what happened? So mother said, oh he had an accident.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 This is the one that died when he was four and a half?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Four and a half, four - four years seven months he was, yes. Yes. But - it's so strange, but - it - it's it's very funny, and - and I know that they had a - a - a very - wel
l supposed to be a wonderful man there, he was Russian or something, he couldn't speak very much English, and he was saying something to mother you know and he'd got one of these beards you know and he was saying something over mother and so mother said t
o
 the - doctor that was going round, she said, what does he say, what's he laughing at me? So he said, well, she said - from what we can understand he said he didn't know which was the biggest, the mother or the baby you know, he was sort of - you know, co
m
paring you know. Because - it's very funny because sometimes quite - 'course my mother's mother - was a - was a very big woman, you see. She was over twenty stone. Yes, that's very funny. Yes. And yet - yet she was the only that was small, they were all, 
you know, quite big - people you know. There were eight of them in the family you know. Because -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where did they come from, the Fulham Road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - mother was - several - two or three of them were born in the Fulham Road. They were all born in Lo
ndon. You know, all the children, but grandma - grandmother actually is as I told you - she originally came from Lichfield, and - her ancestors way back - were from Doctor Johnson, yes she was a Johnson you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where did your father come from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh - he come from Forest Hill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Is that in London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh well - yes, well it's - they call it Surrey, it's on the Surry side you know, yes, of course it is a suburb of London, yes. Yes, he came - he came from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your mother have any jobs before she got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, she was a ladies maid, yes, when - you know, when - you know, she met - met - dad you see. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old was your father when you were born, you say he was born in 1870, he'd be thirty-two wouldn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Something like - yes, yes, he was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How about your mother, how old was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh about twenty - three or four, something like that. Oh she was younger -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father continue as a chef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well you see when - well he did when he could you 
know, when he could get them, but of course as I say by that time you know they were getting a lot of - foreign - people into the - places you know and that sort of thing and - and of course he - he hadn't - any new techniques you know, I mean, he suited 
-
 he suited - you know, the Generals and the Officers in the - and - and they say they were very critical people. They wanted - they wanted him - they - they gave a - gratuity and they gave so much - land you know, sort of - un - you know, tilled - land an
d
 what have you - if we'd have gone to Canada you see. But of course - if we could have all gone together I think mother would have gone. You know. Because I mean we were - we were just young and we couldn't have been a help you see and - because they - th
e
y - they said that dad would have made his fortune in Canada. You see. And they sent - they actually sent our - berths you know for - for the boats. But you see we couldn't - dad didn't - dad didn't come away you see - actually he was - war was over in '1
8, well it was - it was nearly '19 before dad got back because they were all on the Rhine you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 He was cooking for them there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, he still carried on. But by that time you see he was billeted on a German family. And strangely enou
gh - the - the wife's name was Hilda, which was my mother's name, which is the German name, and - and they - they called me - always called me Freda, which if of course a German name. And the little girl was called Freda, you see, so of course when he hea
r
d these people - yes, it was so funny you know, and - and as he said - of course - I mean he - he'd got no love for the Germans and he saw what terrible things, you know, that some of them had done, but these were Bavarians and - and I suppose they were s
o
rt of like us, they were just the ordinary people you know. But he said, after - after what he'd experience in France and various parts of Belgium, he said, that the ordinary German people were - were really - far better than - you know, in - in - in lots
 
of respects you know, they were much cleaner and much - and - they weren't so avaricious as the - as the others had been, you know, I mean he did - he did say that you know. But - and of course he - he quite liked - he quite liked German - Bonn, you know,
 
which I believe is a very nice city, I've never been there but - I believe it's very nice. And - he was there of course before he could get - you know sort of - but of course by that time I mean you know things were very different you know I mean on a dif
ferent basis and I mean he was - but of course there was so many of the - staff still there, I don't know what sort of - what they do, you know, and then of course the time he got}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 home you see, you know, and various jobs had been taken and what have you you
 see and - and of course he decided - we - we - you know, they decided against going but - I often think it would be rather a pity, but they couldn't keep me - kept me out of Canada if I'd have wanted to because it's on my birth certificate, see mother ha
d
 to send them you see before she got any pay - from the Canadian - so on the back of our birth certificates was - dependant of Canada. So - had I have wanted to go to Canada, you know, years ago I - I don't think they could have kept me out you know, I wo
uld have gone but - of course as I say, now it's - it's not much - I mean twenty or thirty years ago I - I probably might have gone you know but - now I mean - I'm just stuck, you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When your father came back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Of course he wasn't a Canadian.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 He took chef jobs whenever they were available?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well, when - when they were available, or he - he did anything you know, right up to that - but of course during - during the war he was working in a factory.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 In the second world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh in the - this war - this last war, yes. Yes. Yes, he was working in a factory, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Going back to the houses you lived in before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many rooms would there be in these houses?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Mostly six roomed houses. Mostly six roomed houses in those days. And of course as I say we had no bathroom but we didn't }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
iss it because we always had - there was always a wash house and there was always a - a sort of a garden and there was always you see, there was always, you see yo
u didn't have to have your children playing in the streets, you see you'd always got - a sort of a garden or a back yard which you could make into a garden and of course my mother - had green fingers, that is - that is part - that - that - is what's left 
of a little piece of - of - of a bouquet from her - the golden wedding. Yes, and - and I kept it ever since. And - and of course this is - this is my garden. That - that there is - is a stone you know. Yes. No, no, it's avocado. Av}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 cado stone you see. I've 
grown that - myself you see, and - we - we - we always - we always had, you know, when we haven't had a garden we've always had - you know, a few pots and things around although of course as I say my mother wasn't - she was a Londoner but - a lot of peopl
e
 think you know Londoners - are no good, but you know, majority of Londoners, real Londoners, are - are very fond of gardens, and you see - you see - that's what - you can't sort of make people understand, you see - round about eighty, ninety years ago yo
u
 see - the whole of London - you know, there were gardens, and it was green you see and of course you know childhood memories you see that there always was a garden and I mean I can remember going to my grandma, she lived in Fulham at the time, and I can 
r
emember going there and - I mean - she always kept - kept hens you see, and of course we used to think it was - it was wonderful you know to go and - you know, get an egg out - the nest you know sort of thing and - and of course she used to try with my - 
m
y little brothers to say, now go an - go and - go and tell the chickens that you want an - an egg, you know, and of course they used to look at her you know and then they used to say, don't be silly grandma. Chickens can't talk. Chickens can't - you see, 
s
he used to try to - you know, keep them as little children but you see - even then - even - what sixty - odd years, seventy years ago, I mean - the children were beginning to sort of learn you see. I mean I know - education was nothing - like it is nowada
y
s and there wasn't the advantages, but I will say we learnt the basic things. I mean, and - and there's very few children - you know, or people rather of my age today that can't write properly, read properly, and spell correctly. And - my - my mother used
 
to be absolutely amazed, now - on Sunday - I always used - I always listen to University Challenge you know, and you know I was amazed at some of the - some of the things that they didn't know. I mean, some of the answers I didn't know obviously I didn't 
k
now the technical type of things, but there were some history questions and some of the questions that I'd already got out you know before Bamber Gascoigne said, you know, so and so, and - and my mother was the same in the old days 'cos she never had a te
l
evision, she - she had wonderful eyesight but she was frightened of - you know, she wanted to preserve it so she only had the radio, but there used to have the quizzes on there you know with the children, and she used to say, well I don't know what the ch
i
ldren today - and do you know, she - she - she she would - you know, say to me, you know, so and so - so and so, you know. And then they'd say, well now you've got two more seconds or whatever it is, and she'd say, now fancy, and where did you say they co
me from? Some Grammar school or what have you you know. So she said, well, they don't teach them much do they, they don't know that. And do you know, it was - it - it's amazing the things that they don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your parents show a lot of interest in your schoolwork when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, I was very fond of school, yes, I was - I wasn't very brilliant. I - I've got cousins that are very - I've got - I've got a cousin that's a Don and - and most of my people, most of my - cousins and th
at sort of thing, they're all these rather highly paid civil servants you know. But they all went abroad you see, but all of us, all of us all round the family have all - all - all spent a lot of time abroad you know in various places you know, because ev
e
n when I was, you know, about seventeen or eighteen as I say only earned a few shillings a week, I don't know, somehow we used to try and contrive and - to - to go - to, you know - to go - go abroad to do some -something or other. And mother used to be - 
s
o - so frightened you see that we would be so - far behind you know my cousins and other people you know 'cos they - they'd had - means of having a better education than us you see, and she used to say well - you must - you must learn to speak French if y
o
u can't do anything else. So - oh from when I was quite little - we used to - you know - do all the - food and things you know and - all - various things we'd ask for you know, in French. Well when I was about sixteen, I - I went to stay on a farm in Norm
a
ndy. And - they never ever - they never even seen - I mean it wasn't like going to Paris or somewhere like that, it was really - a way back place you know. And - I knew these people, I stayed there for about three months. But they never - they never heard
 
anybody - well for - for a whole week you see I - I had to live on eggs 'cos I could only - I could only think of oefs you see. And - I mean I wasn't - exactly starved if you know what I mean but you see I couldn't ask, I mean, I had to say cafe, coffee, 
y
ou know, cafe, 'course I never saw tea, you didn't, you know, especially in those days, and - and they had an orchard and I could go and pick some fruit and - you know, that sort of thing, you know, I wasn't - you know, starved - to all that. But at the s
a
me time I mean it wasn't - it wasn't quite - wasn't quite the same you know, and - so that - I very soon learnt - to ask - you know, what things were. But I - I learnt wonderfully with the children you see, with these little children you see, that were th
e
y, of course they'd never seen anybody English so as we used to go out for a walk you see they used to point to various things you see, we'd see a tree you see, so they'd say, in Anglaise? I'd say tree. So they'd say - I'd say, en Francaise? They'd say, a
rbre, you know, and then we'd go along further along and you know and then we'd see a cow, a va}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
he you see, or a dog, chien, you know, what have you you know, what - whatever we saw you see we'd - we'd do, and we'd - well one day - I know - the - I was out 
with these kids and I suppose I'd been away from home a long time you know I never heard anybody speak any English or anything you know, and these children were chattering away you see and - I suppose I got a bit fed, up, I said, oh shut up, like that. So
 
- the little boy, one of - quite a little boy, about five, he went back to his father who was quite a big pot in the village you know you see so he was telling him in French you know that he could say this you see so of course they were all grouped round 
a
nd then all of a sudden - out of this little boy's - came, shut up, you know. And of course they went round oh their son could speak English you know, hadn't got the remotest idea what it meant. Well - it was very funny because - on one occasion while I w
as there - the friend that I'd - I'd gone - who we'd met in - in London, I mean she originally came from - Near Rhouane you know where this village was, and - she came down to stay you see. Well of course - I'd always spoke very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 haltingly}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  when I spoke becau
se I had to think of what I was trying to say, you know, to - get it out you see, so of course I - sort of spoke in syllables very very slowly. Well of course when she came and of course she could speak English, she'd been over in England for years you kn
o
w, and when she came you see we started talking you see and of course these children were looking at me 'cos I was talking nineteen to the dozen to her you see 'cos I - hadn't heard any - and of course what amused her so much was - that you see, these wer
e
 all her relatives you see and she could talk about them you see and of course I could feel my face going scarlet because she was saying oh her, oh she's a proper old so - you know, she was saying and of course I was - I was so terrified, and they'd be lo
oking and smiling you see, thinking how marvel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ous it was that - this Marie could - could speak and - and - how I wasn't, you know, as - tongue-tied as they thought I was you see, and - and of course she was enjoying it all hugely and because I was crimsoni
ng you know every - every moment because I - I kept thinking, you know, oh you know, they'll hear you you know, and I kept looking at her you know and she was roaring, she was enjoying it terribly you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was that the first time you ever went abroad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
That was the about the first time when I - I'd actually been, of course it was a bit of a - a - you know, of course you went by boat in those days and that sort of thing you know, and that, but - of course I think that gave me the liking for it so
 after that I - I started going to various - places you know. In the - for holidays, yes, oh yes, oh yes, holidays, and - you know, I quite liked it, and I went -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever do French at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. Oh no, we weren't that sort of school you know. I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it an ordinary board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
It was just an ordinary - very ordinary school, but I will say that for them, and - and - and what you - what - what you learn when you are young like that you never really forget you know. No, I ne
ver forgot and - I - I mean I think considering everything they did us very very well. There were - there were very few teachers, they were very big classes you know, but - I don't know, they taught us the basic things. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What were they like on things like punctuality and tidiness and manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Oh yes, well of course that was one of the great - it was a Church school you see, it belonged to the church, but - that was one of the - one of the great things you see and of course in those d
ays you see children - I mean, even - even unruly children that didn't - probably obey their parents very much always obeyed the teacher you see. But of course there was a cane in those days, not that ever I received it. But - there was a cane and it was 
a deterrent and - and quite frankly I mean - I - I don't think it really hurts anybody - that much, you know, when - you know, it - it's one of those things that make you remember, and I don't think it's such a bad thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it used very often on other people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, not really. Not really. Only on -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it girls in one section and boys in another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No. No, it was only a small school. As you'll see if you ever go around there, it's a furniture galleries now, but at the back - oh our - our 
- our wildest form of recreation was that there was a sort of a playground, well under this playground was - very - very unsafe place to have it but - they had it in those days, was the fire station. And of course it was the - it was the old - fire - hors
es you see. And of course if there was a fire on during when we were out playtime oh that was our great moment you know. And of course they thought it was - it was really a marvel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ous - marve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
lous to watch you know and of course the - all the things all shi
ning and - and - oh it was - it was - it was a wonderful sight you know. And those horses, they seemed as if they - and if they knew that they'd just got to - you know - rush and - and - and - and get there you know, it was - it was a wonderful thing. Yes
,
 we - I - I think you know, we - we enjoyed life very much, I mean - we made the most of what we got. Which I don't think they do, you see too much is done for them nowadays you see. Of course we hadn't got radio, we hadn't got anything, but we did have -
 
as I say we had this piano, and we also had - my father was very fond of - of - of gramophone. And of course my mother had made one or two - she made for His Masters Voice, she made one or two records you see and we could - listen to my mother sometimes s
i
nging you know. But of course they were all the - the type of songs that they went for in those days you see - with her type of voice, she - sang like the Holy City and things like that you see, which of course - are still - I mean - I suppose people stil
l do - you know, because she was - she was very - very much in oratorio and - things of that kind you know, that was the - sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How often a week would she go and do this, would it be now and again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh, just now and again, you know, the
y'd say do you see I suppose like - like the things nowadays that get into the charts and that, they get a certain - a certain - thing would be - required you see and then you see I suppose they know they've got a sort of a note I suppose of various - sin
g
ers that do various things you see, and if they wanted that type of music you see, they'd - they'd - send for mother you see and then she'd do recording what - what they - but of course it was in the old days of the wax - my mother's explained it to me, t
h
ey were wax you know. Well then I you - if you - if you did anything wrong - of course it could be wiped out there and I think - I think she - in the early days she sang sometimes - at home she had what they called a recording trumpet thing you see, and -
 
I think - she sang with me in her arms sometimes you know, when I was - quite young. And I think only once I cried and - came into - you know, that had to be got out and then - you know, I had to be handed to somebody and she did it again, but - it was ve
r
y seldom that - that that sort of happened you know and I - I suppose in between ways you know that they sort of managed, but I mean she didn't do anything on a - on a - much of a commercial basis you know, I mean it was very few and far between you know,
 I mean - I - I don't know what they got in those days, about a pound I suppose you know. Well it was a lot then you see because as I say the money - the money - did - did very well you see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever have anything like lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, 
well we had to at time you see because as I say sometimes we had to pay about sixteen shillings or a pound a week. Well you see - it - it - you know, it still meant - so of course mostly my father used to have these - young men because you see they - they
 
- they probably - a lot of them worked at Harrods you see, well then you see you could put - they were very big rooms in - in - the - the housed that they used to build, they built - you know, quite nice rooms you see in the Victorian era they built - fai
r
ly big, and you see you could put three up then in a room you see. Well you charge as little as about five shillings each and something like that you see, that's what you did, well you see they had most of their food - I think dad used to get up and give 
t
hem all a cup of tea, you know. And - mum didn't go into their rooms only to do the beds you know after they'd gone and - and they'd have their meals at work you see, and then - I mean, even if they were - sort of training and probably - only earning - yo
u
 know, about thirty shillings a week, well you see, that wasn't much you see, there was no fares because we lived - you know, a few - walk from Harrods you see, and so they had no fares so - you know, as I say, they - they made out that way you see and of
 course we all - we always seemed to - seemed to manage you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What would the other five rooms be, would one be a parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, the - the - the - we had to have a parlour, I mean that was a sort of - that was the status thing, it wasn't a
 - colour television of course in those days. I mean, you - you liked to have a room where - well - at least the parlour was the room that if you were ill - you - you were always shoved in there. The - you know, and of course, with - with the children the
r
e was obviously a room you know, and then of course mum and dad - of course dad had such - you know, unusual sort of hours and that sort of thing, he had a little room on his own because very often you see he'd be working at such different hours that - it
 
would be more convenient to - you know, to - so he had a little room that - obviously would have been my room, being the only girl if - you know, and I used to - sleep in with the boys, but of course as they were so much younger than me you see it didn't 
really - avail anything you know, until of course we got older and then of course I had, you know, and - and then probably we had somebody else, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I suppose the fact that your mother and father worked different hours, and that your father worke
d irregular hours would mean that you wouldn't all be there at the same time for meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, but still we always got over that, as I say, these ranges were marve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 ll}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ous things you see, you could put thing in and they'd keep things hot. And you see and i
t wouldn't burn you see, it's not like a - even a gas stove or a gas cooker or - electric cooker you see, it's not the same. You see, with that you get a temperate sort of heat and you see of course you always had hot water because you - you kept the fire
 in you see, you kept the range in your see. So it was - it was rather wonderful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you always have a lodger in the houses you lived in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well more or less.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You lived in about four or five didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Oh yes, we did. Yes, more or
 less, yes, because as I say we - we mostly had a six roomed house you see, that's the way the houses were built you see, and of course - you know, to - to pay the rent and - you know, to - sort of - go - you know, I mean. It was - it was more or less nec
essary really you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Why did you move from house to house in those times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh, I don't know, I suppose it was - just - well I mean we didn't - we didn't move every five minutes you know, I can only remember about - I suppose about six moves in
 the whole of my life you know. Until - I think we had far more moves from the - from the beginning of the last war - 'til - you know, through the bombing and what have you you know. Much more. But of course we - we - we never have - in those days you kno
w you - you wouldn't have lived in a place like this. You - you'd reckon to be very poor to live in a place like this. Now I'm jolly glad to be living here. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you change houses because your father had got another job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well sometimes
, sometimes but then you see - even that didn't - didn't - present any problem to dad because he'd got his bike, because - you see he wouldn't - he wouldn't have minded if it was an hour away, if it was - if it was a good job. He - he wouldn't think of an
 hour and an hour back as a - anything. You know, with the bike, I mean he wouldn't - he wouldn't think of it in terms like that. So that - you know, one thing - balanced another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever have any relatives living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No. No, all our relatives were better off than us you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 They lived quite near really?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, not really near, no, not - really near. Had one relative - a brother of my mother's that lived in - in Pimlico at one time, he was a musician.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How often would you see relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh - two or three times a year I suppose, something like that, but mother did have for - for quite a considerable time, she did have a - a younger brother of hers living with her. He was a musician. He never ever married. He - he di
ed when he was about forty-two. And - he was - he was one of the original - and funny I heard it on the - television the other night, he was one of the original members of Paul Whiteman's band. Yes. And he went out to America to - you know, with - with Pa
ul Whiteman. He - he - ended up as - bandmaster of the Sussex Showmanry - of course she had four brothers, there were four girls and four boys you see, and they were - they were all musical you see, they were all the - all the - all the boys were musical.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say that the mother and father were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - grandfather was you see, he was a minstrel at night you see. And of course he was an umbrella maker during - with his shop during the day you see, but of course having - having this family, because 
it was very sad, he had a - a train accident, he - he - he - my - my - grandmother was a widow at thirty - with eight children. Wasn't a very -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So you never knew your grandfather at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Grandfather, no I never knew him, no, no. But I think my 
mother took after him, he was a little man you see. 'Cos when people used to tease him about grandma being such a - what they call a fine woman you know, so he said, oh well, he liked plenty for his money sort of thing you know and he liked to be - you kn
o
w - but - he was - he was a very - very advanced man for his time I think you know. Very - very much so, he was very keen on education. Two of her brothers went to St Marks College. You know, the Fulham Road, well - part's in Fulham Road and part's in - K
i
ngs Road. They went to St Marks College. Two of her brothers. But of course in those days you see again you see, it was the boys that was considered to be - to get - well - I mean, they - they sort of - you see, girls in those days either went into servic
e
, you see, and then got married young you see, that - that - that was what there was for girls you see, I mean, you didn't - I mean, shop life you know, was - was considered very - you know - down you know sort of thing you know, but - of course mother wa
s always - always a bit of a singer and when she was quite a - quite a small child she sang to Queen Victoria, and I'm always sorry that that went in the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 bits}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 , and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it a record of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, no. No. She sang to her personally you know - on the 
top of Constitution Hill you see, well of course Queen Victoria was quite an old - you know, getting quite old then, and - any rate mother said the thing that frightened her was, you see,; there was - all her class there and they sang, you know first of a
l
l, well then the solo mother had to sing on her own you see. And she stood on this little platform well then the - don't know if it was the Chancellor or who ever it was with the - with the Queen you know, beckoned her to come forward and she was terrifie
d to go because of these prancing horses, she was terrified of horses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say you had a wash house out the back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you do the washing out there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh mother would, oh yes. Oh yes, you had to, yes, and of course you had your 
garden, you had your line - line of clothes and of course everything got - you know, and of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did she ever have anyone come in to help clean up the house and things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - well - when she - she was at times very ill you see, she wasn't 
a very strong person, although she lived to a great age - and - she used to have a - a - there's an old lady, we called her Old Tilly, and she used to come, she used to go to various people's places, and she come for what they call the day, I think she co
me for half a crown a day and her dinner, you know, that was the - thing in those days. Well then, - she'd do - she'd do a proper wash, everything you know, sheets and you know the whole lot you know. And she'd be out there and then, you know, mother }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 wo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 d 
send me out with cups of tea or glass of beer I think she had you know, jug of beer, 'cos as I say children were allowed to go and get it for her in between and then of course we'd call her in and then she'd have her dinner with us, you know, round the ta
ble in the kitchen, you know, we had a big kitchen table you know. And - and then - she'd go on 'til about four or five you know, and then - a cup of tea and then - you know, something -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What day of the week would this be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Usually on a Monday, Mo
nday was generally wash day, yes, and of course somehow or other the weather used to be different in those days somehow, we used to get - as I was saying to someone the other day you know, you - you always got proper sort of summers and winters and I can 
r
emember - you know, I can remember you know very very deep in snow you know and - and - and - and the snow settling and stopping you know, I can - I can remember that very plainly as a - as a child, but - 'course it never seems to happen nowadays. Well I 
t
hink - well I think so. They laugh at me but I say it's because it's - it's all this - you know, nonsense up above, all this nuclear business you know. And - they - they - they all say that it - it - it's nonsense but I don't know, I'm - I'm pretty sure i
t
 is, we never had it before. You could pretty - you could pretty well judge the weather you know and I mean of course children - more or less you see, you were - you were sort of - penalized about holidays in a way because you see - you sort of more or le
s
s had to go away when the children had school holidays you see, that was the - that was the point. But as I say, we - we didn't - we didn't have - lots of holidays. But we had lots of day out, you see, that was - that was our way, but I don't think we rea
lly missed it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would there be paid holidays for your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh I don't think so in those days, no, I don't - no because you see he did - well Bank Holidays he was mostly working you see. You see, he did - he did this what they called more or les
s casual type of work you see, I mean - the force of - you see any hotel or - that type of thing, it's - it's - it's totally different you see, it's - it's - it is casual you see, it's not a - as I say it's not a - a definite - you see, I think that's why
 
- you know - other people in the family thought - you know, my mother hadn't done the right thing, you know, dad hadn't - you see - my father was very nice man but he was - you see, my mother would have had the push and she would have the go-ahead to do t
h
ings, but my father was - if it's possible he was sort of too contented, you see, if he just got enough that was all right for dad you see. He wasn't - he wasn't so ambitious that he wanted to do - you know, I think he could have done much more than he di
d
, you know what I mean. I don't think he - I think he sort of - under-rated himself you know, more than - was really necessary you see, but you see - what he did - enabled him to go off and do what he wanted and he - he felt that that was all right and no
body ought to grumble. And as mother never grumbled you know, I mean, she just sort of accepted it, he never interfered with what she wanted to do, providing - that I - or somebody else did it you see, I mean - so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you think both of them gave you the ideas of what things to consider important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh well - I think I can - achieve something from both of them really, you know what I mean. I mean - you know - that - both my mother and father, they all - all had a dread, I think people did i
n those days, of sort of hire purchase and things like that I mean, we was always taught that - you must have - they'd be horrified with me because I hire this, but - I feel that anyone in position you know, to buy a television, you know, and you don't kn
o
w much about it - I mean anybody can come in and tell you - that - things are gone, you know, whether they have or not and it can be a very expensive business, that was the reason why I did it. But apart from that I mean - I would never think - I would ne
v
er think for instance of having a - a suit or a dress or anything like that or - or furniture or anything on hire purchase, never. And I think that's been instilled in me you see, we were always taught that you - you save for what you wanted and - and - t
hen when you saved it you got it, you see, that was the thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did they give you pocket money when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, I say, I - I used to have about three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence a week, when - of course when dad wasn't earning I didn't have it. But I used to make it up because I used to do errands for people you see and get tuppence here and tuppence there and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of people did you do errands for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh, anybody that wanted them, and - mostly people that hadn't got children to d
o them, 'cos people that had children didn't - didn't reckon to pay you to do their errands you see. But of course - it was - it was hard tack in those days you know. And - one of my brothers, he used to do a paper round. And his paper round was - in Knig
h
tsbridge and he used to do all the Officers in Knightsbridge barracks. And he was - they all called him Curly, 'cos he had curly hair too like the other one, and - he was - he was very popular, but I think it was about five shillings a week you know. But 
of course he - he - he used - but of course that was no - no bother getting up early because - I mean, you - you got up early in those days you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What time would you have breakfast in those days?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well you'd have - have breakfast when he finis
hed his round you see, he - he'd - he'd - I generally used to make him up - about half past six you see, to go you see, and I'd - I'd have a - you know, a sandwich or something ready for him and a cup of milk, we didn't have tea, not when we were very you
ng. And - off he'd go. Well when he came in about - half past eight or nine, you see, then he'd have his breakfast, well then I - I'd cook him a breakfast you see. And go to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of thing would you have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, depend
s what we'd got you know. Scrambled eggs usually, 'cos I used to get what they called cracked eggs which you got cheaper, you took a basin, and - you got about - seven for three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence was the current - you know - rate in those days -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where would your mother bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
She'd probably be at work, yes. Yes, she'd probably be at work, so I - I mostly did - well, it - it - it depended what - what time it was you see. So that I got used to, you know, sort of doing things like that. Well I did sort of simple 
things you know. I mean - the kids had to have what I - I - I - I got sort of thing you know. Used to get one or two grumbles but not very much 'cos I used to try and work in - things that I knew that they - they would like you know. I mean we used to get
 
a lot of grumbles, you know, I don't want greens and I don't want this, that and the other, and I said, well you've got to have them because they're good for you, you know, and - if you don't have 'em you can't have your pudding and that sort of thing. An
d that's the way we did in those days. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where would you have the meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh in the kitchen. Oh yes, we always had - well you see in those days you had a big kitchen with a dresser, with all the things on it. And - you know - a nice fire an
d what have you you know and it was always - I always think the most comfortable place in the house, I mean, as I say the parlour was for visitors chiefly, and if you weren't very well - you were laid up in the parlour in state for the doctor to call on y
o
u you know. And what have you. But - on the whole it was - I - I - I've got no complaints - really and truly. I mean - I don't think - I - I think - we were - you know - in our time, I think we were much happier than the people are nowadays. I do honestly
. I - I think that. And I think it was because well we - you know, I mean - it isn't - it was no good grumbling. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you ever remember being conscious that your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, very often. Oh I was very cons
cious of - of that you see, and all the time, all - you know all my very young life, you know I can - always - always remember - thinking about - like the price of anything before I'd - I - you know ever suggest it you see. Other children might say, oh we
l
l, you know, we want so and so and so and so, but - and of course the boys would say that you see but - I would say, oh no - mum can't afford that, oh we can't have that. Oh no, you can't have that, no. No, well, I'll speak to dad tonight and I'll ask him
 
what we can have for a change from milk - you know, 'cos milk pudding didn't go down too well you know every day you know. And - and then - when apples were very cheap you know and - then I got the idea, you know, from dad about an apple charlotte you kno
w
 and I used to put the jam in first and then the fruit and then the bread - bread. Well he used to tell me you see - of course he used to tell my mother but she used to say, oh I know what to do, you know, another of your expensive ideas. But - you see, i
f
 you listened to dad it wasn't all that expensive but you see, my - my mother wasn't - well - she didn't like cooking, I mean, I couldn't say she couldn't cook because she could, but - she didn't like it, and I mean - to really - to - you know, to - to re
a
lly do cooking you've got to like it I think, you have. And I did like it. And of course I used to do - what my mother used to call - she used to say, oh we don't want all the embellishments, and I mean if we had a trifle you know, we had - used to get so
m
e stale - sponge cake you know, or we had some stale cake left you know and we used to make it up in that and of course - I always used to have to decorate it with a few - nuts and cherries and something on the top you see. Mother would simply - slap the 
c
ustard on top and there it was you see. But - mother didn't think that was necessary but of course - you see, I was a bit like my father there you see, of course, I mean in that - in - the hotel world and that sort of thing, I mean, the visual look of the
 
thing is - is the things isn't it you see, and of course I used to - you know, and I used to go to all this trouble to - put these things on the top and - and - and do this you see, and - and of course it used to look - it used to look nice. Mother said, 
o
h we haven't got time for that, you know. But - she wasn't an impatient woman by any means, but it was just that - she didn't think it was necessary you see and - of course we - we just used to - used to take it you know and of course sometimes she'd say 
t
o me - you going to make the pudding tomorrow? I said, yes I'll make it. You see, so then I used to do it, you know. That sort of thing, but - oh we got - we - we got on all right, I think we were very - you know, we were very happy family really you know
.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You sound very close to both your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well I think - I think we were really, and - well, for the last fifteen years I'm very thankful to say that neither of my parents - and of course another thing they had a dread - a dread of, which of 
course was rather silly and I had to talk to - and it was only the last five years of their - their life that - that I ever got them to - to accept any supplementary or anything you know. They - they thought - in their way it was charity, you see, and I h
a
d to - had to sort of tell my father, I said all the years you've been working - because - you see, it is - it is a right, and - and you should have it. And my mother never had a thing like a home help, now the hospital make me have a home help, since I'v
e
 had this bad back. And - she never had a home help, no, because - I used to come home from work and - if she wasn't able to do - I used to do it you see. And - and - I mean, as I say, she never had anything from - you know, any of these things that - you
 
know, I mean actually, I mean - you know, people - you know, my age now - I mean, we're really very lucky I mean, there - there's really everything. You know, isn't there. You know, I mean - there - there's no need - for people - I mean, you - you do hear
 
them say, oh we can't manage and we can't do this, well - I mean - I have to manage on just over eight pound a week. That is all I get. And - I - I mean, I have to manage everything. Well when I've settled everything, which I do - I'm - rather methodical 
I have about ninety-five pence to do everything - else on, like - I do an awful lo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 t of writing 'cos I've got - cr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ds of people abroad and various places, and - and - dresses, clothes, what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 have}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 you, all the odd things that you don't - you know, you don't t
hink of, you know, and - and I have - and yet I can - I can manage. I mean, I - I - I don't - I don't have any luxuries, but then they don't waste anything you see I've got so used - to - to - being - more or less what you say careful in - in in my younge
r
 days that it stays with you. And of course during the war was another term you know. And of course I - I do think that the average people - you see, they they got a little out of it and - and they're inclined to say, oh well that's no - we - we'll throw 
t
hat away you see. Well, you see - I wouldn't do that, I mean, if - if I got a lot more money I wouldn't - I still wouldn't do it, because - you know, it's just something in me, it's not meanness, I - I'm not a mean person by any means. But - you - you can
 
make do, you can make do. And - and I go a long time before I'd ever ask for any - any help. I remember when going, when we lived in Knightsbridge, I remember going to what is now - the back part of Harrods where Harrods do their dispatching and various t
h
ings and there was actually a - a - a - a dairy there and there was actually a cow there and you could go up, and I used to go - with not an ordinary jug, with - with the bedroom jug, you know, and - and get the milk. And it used to be a penny a - you kno
w
 - penny a - well I suppose it was a pint or probably more than a pint, they didn't have - measure, they used to sort of more or less - fill the jug, you know. And - and I can - I can really remember that. That - that - dispensed with round about - oh 191
2
, something like that you know I believe was the date when they started, you know, get - getting rid of the - the - but there were - and there were a lot of cottages - along there, which - which are now, you know - quite - very modern and, you know, very 
e
xpensive houses, and - cottages with gardens and - quite a lot of the people that lived in them were married - married - members of the - Knightsbridge Barracks. You see, and that - they - they did have a married quarter but - it couldn't hold them all yo
u see, and - a lot of them, you know, preferred to live in these little cottages which were very cheap, and a lot of the children that I went to school with of course were - G}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ardsmen's - you know, Lifeguards children you see, and - it - it was - it was ver
y nice little area round there. Of course it - it's still - it's still very - you know, quite quaint, in - in - in parts and of course some of the older houses are still there, as such you know, and - you know, it was - it was just a little sort of backwa
t
er off the - Brompton Road. But - talking about milk, that is - that is one of the things I remember and of course I remember the - the milk cans, I mean, before - ever this bottle business came about you know. And - no, but they - you know they left - th
e
y left cans at the - at the door, but - mostly you see, mostly, there - there was several - Welsh - Welshmen and it's every Welshman's - idea I think you know if they're in business at all to have a little dairy. You see, and there's so many of them dotte
d
 round all the little shops, and - they used to come round, but then of course in those days you always took a jug up to the milkman you see, yours - and he filled it from this - and they used to have, you know, very highly polished - brass - thing you kn
o
w, and they used to - they had a tap - suppose on it and, you know, they used to fill your - you know, you - you just took the - the vase up, you didn't have sort of - pints of milk left, but if - if for any reason people were out and that sort of thing, 
they used to have the small cans which would hod a pint or a quart or whatever you see. It used to be about a penny or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ha'pence a pint you know. And then of course there used to be a skimmed milk - which one could buy which was about half the price, w
hich was quite nice for - you know, puddings and all sorts of things you know. But - it was very different - proposition of nowadays I can assure you. It's a shilling - shilling a bottle. I mean, it probably wouldn't take more than a shilling a week for y
our milk you know. 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your mother ever do things like bake her own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, I don't think mother did. No, I - I - I - I used - used to do mine quite early on, but of course that's getting more difficult now because you see there are so few b
akers where one can get the yeast, and - I know you can get dried yeast, but - to make bread - really well - I - I think you need the brewers yeast and of course you want a bakers for that. Because - early - early in my life, I - I was in a bakers and I m
ean that was - there were - there were - were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 That was your first job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Yes. And - and I knew quite a lot about bakery you know, and I always remember the old foreman always telling me, unless you want to have sandwiches, he said, never buy a sa
ndwich loaf. He said, because, he said, the bread is compressed - you see, you have to do the same amount of bread like one pound or two pound, and then you have to - when you put the dough in you have to allow, you know, that it will be - definitely that
,
 you see, and every - every loaf in the old days - I mean, nowadays they - they just don't seem to bother anything - but in the old days every loaf was weighed, you see. And if it was - you know, an ounce or - a couple of ounces you see, they always used 
t
o do what they called the makeweight, and they used to keep - a pile of sort of biscuits or something you know because - probably it was only a - a fraction you see, but it - it had to be made up to the - you know, sort of two pound, you see, and this - u
s
ed to go on. Well we used to go to a special bakers when we were kids - not far from here now - it's now - a restaurant, a rather fashionable restaurant, and he was a German, and we used to go there, because his - his makeweight, what we called makeweight
 - was - was always rather nice, it was a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  sort of a - sort of shortbread}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
 biscuit you know that he used to put on you know. And - he always seems that always his - his bread - always worked out as if it was a little bit more, so we used to go all the way dow
n there, it took us quite a - bit further, there, so we could eat the make weight coming back you see. And not - not touch the loaf. But some of them, if - if it was - you know, perhaps a couple of ounces or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid721979\charrsid1069857 more, they would chop up a loaf}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 , you know, and -
 and then put a - you know, a slice of bread or piece of - or roll or something on you see, and - well of course we used to eat that as well you know coming back. It wasn't we were all that hungry but I think there was something - the children always - th
e
y always liked to do something - a little bit different I think don't you, and - oh it's just one of the thing - I suppose it was one of the perks you know, and we felt if we - went another ten minutes walk you know to get the bread well then we'd - you k
n
ow, we'd have whatever there was. It didn't hurt the - you know, I mean, you got your value just the same, I mean, we children saw to that. Yes, I was very - very sorry in the - during the first world war - because - a lot of people went and - broke the p
o
or man's windows you know. Because he was a German and - but of course I believe the man had lived here for years. The same as - there's a - there's a big grocers now, it's still down there, as a matter of fact it was recently - done up and he's expanded,
 
called Seamferini, which of course is Italian, and - and it was very funny because - he of course - was an Italian that came over here very early on, and - settled here in - in Chelsea, and he had a big family, and all his children were born here, and it 
s
eemed so strange to us for a man that we'd known - all our lives as children and - everybody knew and of course these children used to go to the same school as we went to and that sort of thing, had to be interned. But of course that's just one of the - t
h
ings that happen you know, in - but of course in the - in the first world war it was - things were a little bit different you know, people were a little bit different - to what they were afterwards I think you know, with - in that respect, and of course -
 
to us children I mean - children that we'd played with and we'd been to school with, I mean, and - there - there - there were two German girls in - in - in a class I was in - in, and their father was caretaker of the German church. Now a lot of people don
'
t know - just - beyond Montpelier Street, in Montpelier Place, is a little German church. It's a very tiny place, it - a Luther - yes, and her - her father was caretaker of this German church, and her mother was Dutch - you see, and of course she was ofte
n
 taken for a German because Dutch and German I suppose - you know, in talking, but - of course the children were born here, and - you know, the poor woman was terrified, but - I can't - I can't really remember, I think he must have had to go in the finish
.
 But I don't remember, I mean, as far as I remember the children - kept at school. And of course a lot of the children, you know, sort of said, you know, oh they're German, and that sort of thing. But - I - I don't think the majority of cases I mean I don
'
t think we took much - much notice really because I mean we - we - we'd sort of brought up with 'em. As a matter of fact I - I probably looked far more German than they did, because I was very fair as a child and had fair long plaits and that sort of thin
g
 and - and - actually I had a more German name than they did. Which was rather funny. Their name was Newman. Neumann, you know, they - oh well they - they really were German. But - not very long ago I had occasion to go that way, and I thought, I'll just 
s
ee - if they're - and the church is still there, whether it still functions or not, and at the back, there's two little cottages. Very very - very very old, and they're still there. So - and - of course the - the - well I suppose it was like the caretaker
 
you see of the church, there wasn't room in the church anywhere and of course he had - he owned one of these cottages, and the other one in the old days always belong to the - to the midwife, whoever was - the local doctor you know used to have the midwif
e and - and she had the other one, I mean, I think it was a sort of an arrangement that they had, they had it - either very cheaply or - you know, they had it so they}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  were accessi}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ble you know to - you know people around, that sort of thing, but - of course 
I - I - I don't know nowadays what - whether they're privately owned or - been bought or what have you. But the church is still there, it's not shut up because I - I looked as I went by but - I don't know - you know, how they - they - they probably still 
g
o on you know and have - you know, but lots - lots of people - you - you would pass it, I mean - you know, you - you wouldn't think that there was - it's quite a small church, you wouldn't think there was - and almost next door there's - a public house, b
ut a very - very posh one these days you know. Very nice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
one and - it - it always was there. And - you know, you - you'd probably, as I say, you'd probably miss the church, you'd just think - well that's a strange building, you know, and you might not even go up to look, but of course - it is there. 
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you go to church in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, oh yes, well we - we belonged to a church school. You see, and - oh yes, church was - was - was necessary, and - and certain days we - we had to troop down to the church you know. And - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 During the week as well as Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Yes. And we - of course we always went to Sunday school. Oh yes. Went to Sunday school. Oh yes, we had - and of course - nearly every night there was something, th
ere was Band of Hope Monday night, Tuesday night there was the Girls Friendly Society, Wednesday night there was something else. Then - then I used to go to - not far from here, it used to be called the - Young Templars, that was another night, you used t
o go. Oh yes - mother - mother did -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What happened at the Young Templars?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well, the usual things you know, they - they - they taught a little bit, you always started off with hymn singing and things like that you know. I think they'd probably be 
laughed at nowadays but - oh I don't know, I don't think it did us any harm, I mean, we used to enjoy it the same as the G.F.S., Girls Friendly, I mean, we started with a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid721979\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 hymn, then we'd have a talk by somebody or other you know. One thing and another, I don't know that it did a lot of good but it kept us out of mischief, we didn't do any harm and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What time of night were these then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh - they used - we used to go - we used to leave school - round about - four or - just after, and then we'
d go to tea - round about six 'til about half past seven, you know, they weren't - very late does, oh no, I wouldn't have been allowed to have gone if they'd have been late does you see, I couldn't have been spared to - long you know to - but when I got a
 bit older of course I was able to - go to one or two of them you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How often would you go to Sunday school on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well we'd go to Sunday school - Sunday afternoons. Oh yes, Sunday afternoons you know. And of course very often I - I
'd go to - I'd go to - service you know, and - the eldest one of my brothers, he - he was a choirboy, you see, so of course he used to have to go to choir practice on Mondays and - things of that kind you know. Of course we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever have any Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, oh yes, we used to have - oh yes, used to be marvellous outings in the old days, we used to have what they called a brake you know, with horses, and of course it was always you know, want to sit with the driver sort of thi
ng you know. And of course we used to - we didn't go very - they didn't take us very far you know, they used to - take us places like Luslip and - Hampstead Heath and - places like that you know where you could get to in an hour or so you know. And - of c
o
urse we - we used to - save up you know for days - but of course if - we could get a couple of bob, we - you know, we thought we'd done - wonders you know. Then they used to generally provide a sort of - picnic sort of meal for us when we got there you kn
o
w and - let us kids free, we had to go places like that where there was - certain amount of ground you know, and then they used to organize games you know, and football - of a sort for the boys and - rounders or things for us girls you know, and - of cour
s
e usually - when we went it wasn't only just us - our school and that going, there'd probably be others you see and then - they'd get in touch with one of these - smaller circus people you know, quite a small - place and then they'd have probably one or t
w
o roundabouts and - things of that kind about you see, so that - it would be quite entertaining and - and we'd get home round about half past seven - eight o'clock at night you know. That - oh we were very - very - and of course we'd sing all the way comi
ng home. Oh we - we - we used to have some - some good times, we used to look forward to them. It was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 That was in the summer was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. They probably sound very - very tame to children nowadays I suppose you know, but - well I don't know, I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You never went to the seaside with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well, no, not very often, no, I - I don't really very often remember going to the seaside as a child. I - I suppose they must have done at some time or other, I don't think I - I - I sort of - I don't
 recollect any - the only - only times I went to the seaside was when we went for the day, with - like my own people, you know, my mother and father.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your parents go to church as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Mother used to go }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 q}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 uite a bit. No, I'm afraid my father
 wasn't much of a - much of a churchgoer although - he did for a little while, he - he did - take the job of a - a verger. But it was only because they couldn't get anybody, but it wasn't for very long, it was only - you know, he - he only did I think the
 
- the local one was ill or something or other and - ill for some - longish stretch and - he filled in the breach you know and he used to - blow the organ up for the - choirmaster you know, and - organist and - course they used to - create about - you know
,
 how everybody said what little angels the boys were and of course everybody knows choirboys are no more little angels than anybody else, and - and of course there used to be - used to be - great games on, there used to - they used to hold the - choir pra
c
tice then in what is now called the crypt, they - they still call it the crypt in Holy Trinity, and they used it now for - young peoples - you know, they have young - teenagers there you know. But - in - in those days - of course they actually - did keep 
some of the - coffins and things - down - I mean it really was a crypt you know. And - and of course a lot of the most venture - venture some of the boys you know used to get out and - used to go - you know, sort of - s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ooting around and - and - they actually opened one of these - things, you know, oh terrible she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ozzle you know about it. 'Cos they no longer bury there but they - they did bury there up 'til about - forty or fifty years ago I suppose you know. But they don't have - but they've made quite a n
ice - area of it now, they've made quite a nice little sort of - park as it were of it and, you know, people can go with the prams and babies can go and sit there and - and of course they have a lovely new - new sort of - clubhouse now. But - we - we were
 
allowed, when we got up to about the - ex-seven as it was called in those days, the highest class just before you left school, that we were allowed once a week we used to go and play netball there. There was a field there you see and we used to - and I be
l
ieve now locally they still go and - have their - football and what have you there on this - place, it's - it's quite private actually, and - but people can see you from the - from the road, you know, if they're going through there. It's - it's - of cours
e
 it's - all been - built up and - altered to a certain extent, but basically it's - it's still like I remember it all those years ago, I was up there not very long ago, the - Scouts held a - a - what do you call it, a sort of bazaar thing and they - they 
were able to have it out in the open which is rather nice you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You weren't ever a member of the Girl Guides or anything like that were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, I wasn't a Girl Guide, no, no, my - my brothers were - were Scouts and - you know, what - what do
 you call it first of all, what are they - cub - cubs, of course when they were little and then they - went in - no, I don't think - I don't know why I - I - I don't know, I suppose I didn't really - have - or it probably fitted in with another day that I
 couldn't go or something you see, but - I - I - I used to like to - you know, liked to do most things you know that were go - that were going at the time, if it was - you know available at the time I could go, or -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you wear different clothes on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have different clothes to wear on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Yes, oh yes, we always - it was - it was very necessary in those days, we always had - what we called our Sunday - clothes you know, and of course when they got - li
ttle bit old, of course then they got - you know, we took them for weekdays and then when we had anything new it was - first of all it was Sunday clothes, and they were worn on Sundays, oh yes. Majority of people, you know - ordinary working class people 
l
ike ourselves - I mean, did adhere to that you know. And there wasn't so much - people - I mean majority of children played in the streets, we didn't - very much because we weren't allowed to, but - majority of children did, but on Sundays - the mothers s
eemed to have that sort of, you know, oh well, you mustn't - play today, it's Sunday, sort of things you see, and - well of course - children, you know, of that - that era - well I mean, more or less did listen to their - parents you know, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you allowed to play on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - well - not exactly play. I think mostly - mostly Sundays - we - I used to sort of read to them and that sort of thing you know. 'Cos we used to go to Sunday school as I say and - come back from Sunday school and,
 you know, have - you know - a meal and what have you, well then - in the early days of course I mean - you know, you went to bed fairly early you see. No, I don't think - no, Sundays we never - you know. I was - oh I was quite grown up before I ever - ev
e
r thought of - going anywhere other than church, and then - I - I - occasionally used to go, they used to have what they - concerts, what they called Sunday League concerts, don't know if ever you've heard of them. Well - they were very - very - very nice
,
 they used to have them in - well, used to have them at the Chelsea Palace or - any big hall you know, and they were sort of in the old ballad days you know, when you get, you know, you get somebody - like - Indian love lyrics and - things of that kind yo
u
 know, or - if you got a - if you got a baritone or a bass you'd get - Company Sergeant Major and things of that kind, but - they were sort of - that - that type of singer you see, and - you'd - you'd have that and of course there was always an orchestra 
o
f course, there was no canned music in those days. There was always the orchestra and - they'd play band pieces and probably Gilbert and Sullivan and - what have you and things, it - it was very nice, it was about a couple of hours on a Sunday, it was onl
y
 about a shilling to go. And they used to call it - Sunday League Concerts. And - and they - they - they were very pleasant, very nice, but there was never anything rowdy or never anything - it wasn't like the music hall affair you see, 'cos that was Sund
ay you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever go to those?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, used to go to the music hall, yes, when I could, when I got a bit older, oh yes, used to go quite a lot. Oh yes, used to be marvellous because you see, all my life I - I had heard - all these old musi
c hall songs and - lots of people thought I was much older than I was because I mean I knew - I knew all the songs because I had - I had heard them right from - you know - early childhood you see, I - I - I knew them off by heart and I - I knew them prope
r
ly too. Yes. But they were wonderful - wonderful times you know, when I think nowadays I mean, when I - when I - I see the people with the microphones and that sort of thing, they never needed any microphones in those days and - and I mean - they - well -
 
well they just were heard and - and they had to be you know, they had to be good you know. Oh yes. I think it's a great - a great pity that the old music halls - have disappeared. Yes, I used to remember the old Holborn Empire, used to go up there sometim
e
s, 'cos this was when I was much older, I mean, you know, when I was about - sixteen, something like that you know. Mother and I used to go, because it was - it was all - it was all fairly - very cheap I mean, you know, you - you get on the bus to Holborn
 
and - you know, or a tube, and - I mean we always went - up in the gods, which I think was the - of course they say the - they - they used to have their best critics up there because - they really - you know, they really told them that - but then on the o
ther, hand, I mean when they were good, which they mostly all were, you know, I mean - you know }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 - they - they just went on appl}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
auding, I mean it was nothing for them to come back five and six times you know, you - you'd probably - there'd probably be twenty
 turns on the bill you know, but - it was - you know, well packed, but of course if - if there was anything they didn't like I mean, you know, they were very quick to - to let them know and - and then of course they made a hasty retreat but - if they thou
g
ht they were - a sort of a - I think - I think the ordinary British public you know, are really very - very good in lots of ways you know, because if they thought they were very nervous I - I - I remember once seeing - the sort of a juggling act, I wasn't
 
very keen on that sort of thing but it was one of the things you know, and - one of the fellows, whether it was his first time on or - whether he was just learning or what you know he - he - he - he - he flicked and made a - you know, missed, you see. And
 
- you know, instead of - sort of - jeering or - you know, well you know - you know, they - they sort of - well you know, well of course the next time round he did it and he did it all right, there were two or three of them in this - thing you; know, and -
 
he did it all right, but - I - I think - they're - they're rather - rather kind to sort of - you know, if you do make a - make - make a slip - you know, and he was very young and - probably, you know, it was his - but - oh, they still - and at the end the
y got the applause and - you know, just the same as if they - if they done everything right through perfectly you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about things like circuses and fun fairs, were they around then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, there were some circus - circuses, I think - I thin
k the Bertram Mills was around. But - we - we didn't - you - you didn't see much of those at the ordinary music halls. No, used to have to go to Olympia or - or somewhere like that, but it used to be a once a year - thing, you know. No, I didn't very ofte
n
 go, because - I don't know, I used to be a bit frightened. I once saw an accident - once, on - on - you know - that - that was also that was a Japanese, it was - one of these high wire things and they had it from the stage, and we were in the gallery, an
d
 he - he walked - you know - tight walked - rope walk - walked, and the thing was suspended to the top you see and I believe he'd been doing it all the week and this was about the middle of the week, and - as he - he got almost to the gallery which was qu
i
te a long way from the stage you see and he'd got this umbrella you know to balance himself - something must have gone wrong, you see, and he slipped. Well - that man's face, I can remember, because it came very very near to where I was sitting, which I'd
 
got my usual seat in the front row, and underneath the - the greasepaint and - what have you - I could see the - the - horror - or the - in his eyes you know. And - of course he - he - he - he went - he flipped back and he fell onto the stage you see, and
 
- they pulled the curtain down and got a doctor and - I suppose and took him off. Well then the next act was put on you know, they didn't stop for long. And - any rate the manager came out and he said that he's being attended and everything was all right,
 
but I had an awful funny feeling that - you know - everything wasn't all right you know. It - it was just - just because you see, I - I suppose he suddenly realized that something was wrong you se, and - and he just couldn't make it you see. If he hadn't 
h
ave been up so high he probably - if he'd have been in - around by the pit or the stalls you see he could probably - be in a - you know, he could probably have sort have - balanced and - and jumped and - and - and not hurt, but you see, right up in the go
d
s which was - you know, very high up, he - he couldn't do much about it and I - I should imagine he broke his back, I don't know but - it - no - we never really heard about it, but - well of course I suppose it's not good - policy anyway, but in any case 
i
t - it sort of put me off you know, I was quite young at the time, but I - I was very impressed with that you know, and - I thought no, I don't want to see them, so - if ever I did go, it - other times you know and there was one of these turns on which th
e
re were sometimes, I used to always shut me eyes, if - if it was anything coming up you know, to - you know, I used to shut me eyes and I used to say to the others, now - has he gone, is it over, you know, they used to say, yes it's all right and then I -
 I didn't used to watch that, because - I think it's - it's just one of those things that - that happens to you you can't help it's just something that - that happens.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say your mother was a good singer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Your brothers were in a choir, were you ever in the church choir at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Oh yes, I was, because - in - in - in some churches you know they used to have - girls and women, you know, and I - I've got quite a - quite a few certificates for singing and - and what have yo
u. Oh yes I was very fond of singing you know. And I was always yanked out at school you know, to - take part in - and of course I was very lucky you see, because - my mother knowing quite a bit about singing and - this uncle that lived with us that - was
 
- was a musician you see, and of course he used to take me through - through the music part of it you see and - and of course I used to get that and of course - when - when I went back, I mean, most of the children only had - a little tuition from the tea
c
her you see, well - I mean, when we were doing - you know, when you're doing a school play, well of course - when - especially the little children I mean all the mothers and fathers come you know, or the mothers anyway you see, well I mean, they all appla
u
d whether little Johnny, you know, gets up and makes a mess of it or not, I mean everybody - you know - so - it's all pretty good - but the teacher used to be very pleased with me you see because - you see, I - I had more tuition than - most of the childr
e
n, you see, and I - 'course I used to get my notes perfect you see, that was - that was the thing you see, so of course, if you - if you got that part of it all right, I mean the song comes - easily to you you see, so really - I suppose really in a way it
 
wasn't really fair in one way, but - of course they were very pleased because it - you know, it sort of - you know, after all the - singing teacher was very pleased if she got somebody she could sort of - show off to the - you know, to the - rest of the s
chool you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say you did plays and things at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Plays. Oh yes. Oh yes. Well we did - oh, they were very ambitious in those days for us kids you know, used to - do bits of Shakespeare and what have you, I don't know that w
e were always - you know, word perfect in that but - it used to go through and as I say - it went down pretty well you know, the - most of the audience of course were our - but - but - of course we - we used to have quite a - quite a few local people, big
-
wigs that used to come you know and of course - they used to very politely applaud and they used to sort of present the prizes and what have you you see to us. But - it all went down very well. Well I think on the whole you know, -we we didn't do too badl
y for a little - little school you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your parents go to the school much or take much interest in what you were doing there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, yes, we used to get - get the usual - you know, notes to take home you know and - if - you know, if we wer
en't doing very well you know, it used to be, you know - spoken of you see, and - and that sort of thing, but - they used to sort of ask - I suppose ask our - our parents, you know, what, you know, they would like us, you know, to do, you know, later on -
 
in life, but of course - we never had any what I call - any fancy learning. Anything that I learnt otherwise - I used to go to evening classes when I was - when I had left school you see, and I went to evening classes, just here - in the Marlborough - sch
ool.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Evening classes in what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well, I - I - I wanted to learn - learn - I started to learn French. And we were very lucky there because they had - noted teachers, a very old lady and her daughter. They - they both used to teach French, one used t
o teach - teach, you know, first year students and the other one used to teach them more advanced students you know. And - you know, it was - it was just - it was something extra to learn, but you had to take two subjects always you see. So the other - th
e
 other subject that went with French which I - I didn't feel I'd have any use for, was commercial correspondence, which I had to take - as a compulsory subject to - to learn the French you see. Oh I think it was only about half a crown a term in those day
s that one paid so you could afford it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old would you be when you took these classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 About fifteen. I left school at fourteen and - I - left school just after I was fourteen you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many evenings a week was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh only
 once a week. Once a week, I think it was a Wednesday, two hours. Two hour periods they were, seven 'til nine they used to be in those days. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you go for one year or two years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh one or two years I think I did, you know, in various thin
gs. Of course you could take on all sorts of things you know - but - I didn't - I didn't seem to thing that anything else would - you know, would really be necessary in a way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 This was while you were working in the bakers shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, I started - 
I started out in life - well I started out in life at Harrods actually. I went into the Counting House when I - when I first left. But - they used to - they used to come to the school every so often to know how many people were leaving, and then they used
 
to set us a small exam, you see, well I mean, everybody more or less passed unless they were absolutely you know - very lazy or very you know - uneducated and - and then you went. But of course it was - in those days it was quite a thing to be - be taken 
on, you know. They didn't take everybody, and they were very particular - I mean - of course such things couldn't be now, they used to go through - you know - who your parents were and - your grandparents and - this sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So they came to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh - oh - well they used to come and - you see, every - every now and again you see, that was the nearest school you see, and I suppose they knew there'd be children leaving, they were always looking out for - for school leavers, and of course that i
s one thing about Harrods, they have a very good system there for teaching youngster. And once you've been to Harrods and gone through their - you know, their - you - you - you can always get a job anywhere. Because they know that if you've had that train
ing that you must have - you know, you must have been - fairly good or - or you wanted have gone through it you see. And - but of course they weren't - they weren't all that good prayers you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How much did you get in that job then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well I got five shillings a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 For how many hours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh - I think I used to work - I believe I used to work from half past eight - the shop didn't open 'til nine, but that didn't affect any - anything, I mean, you - you had to get there before that, hal
f past eight I think to about six I think it was in those days. And - of course Saturdays you were off at one o'clock, you know. And in the early days too they used to - they used to always supply our food. We used to get food you see, and of course havin
g no fares to pay you see - it was all right, so I was able to give my mother half a crown a week out of five shillings a week, and able to buy myself odd things which I had to get you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 This would just be a midday meal you'd get would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, a midday - oh yes, they didn't reckon to give us tea because we - we finished they reckoned, you know, in time to get tea.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How long were you there for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I was there in the the first instance for about three - three and a half years, then I got 
a transfer, I went to Dickens and Jones which belongs to Harrods in Regent Street. And - I was there for - quite a few years. Well then I went back to Harrods afterwards - to learn millinery. I was an apprentice in the millinery department.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old would you be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
About - let's see, fourteen, seventeen - oh be about eighteen, nineteen I suppose. But then I left and I went into the - into the bakery - business - you know, line, which was very hard work, half past seven 'til half past seven, wit
h appropriate times off in between you know for meals. But - strang}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 el}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
y enough it - it - it seemed to agree with me, the - - I like people you see and I like to - I liked the shop life. You see, when I was apprenticed you see you only had the - people - you
 know, at the table - the milliner and other people and that sort of thing and you were sort of - and - and - and when I was in the Counting House you see you were in an office and you were enclosed with - well a dozen people say or something of that kind
. But I liked - I like people and - of course the shop life suited me. But I was very delicate as a child, I used to have - very bad faints, I - I - I left - almost every job I had for health reasons.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How long were you in the bakers shop for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh 
quite a few years, quite a few, I got up to be manageress. And - you know, learnt quite a lot about it - you know, it's not just all - you see when you're manageress you see you're responsible for - if there's a baker - yes, not only that - you're respons
i
ble for - all the ordering of goods, you see, the - of course there'd - there'd be a foreman baker who would do all the bread and - and - and things of that kind. Well then there'd be pastry cooks you see who would do the - the cakes and what have you and
 
- and of course - usually we had - usually - usually - usually a foreigner we had that - that was - used to do all the spectacular icing and things of that kind, and of course I used to love to go down when they were - they were doing things, and of cours
e
 he didn't mind you know and - used to like to watch you know, I think it was - you know, that sort of thing I - I had a - had a liking for it. Well then you see you had to - you had to order - all the things, they would give you a list and then you had t
o
 sort of work things out - and - it - it was quite a - you know, it's quite a tricky job really to do, but - I liked it, I - I thought it was very nice. 'Course things are much easier these days, although of course - there - there's so little - little hom
e
 baked - bread about these - these days, you see it's all pre-packed and it's all oven - done up, you know, from - straight from the bakeries that - that one doesn't see you see, in those days there were about twenty different kinds of - of bread. Differe
n
t kinds of loaves to - remember, you know, fro one thing, and - as I say, the first thing we had to do - first thing in the morning we had to put all these - loaves on the scales and weigh them, and if they didn't weigh, you see, we either rejected them, 
p
ut them in a separate thing, and sold them cheaply, you know. Or - we put this - sort of - biscuits or what - what have you as - as make weight you see, that - that's still went on - that - that still went on in - round about 1917, something like that you
 know, when I was - you know, doing it. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How would you get on with your employers in the Harrods job and the bakers shop to begin with before you became a manageress?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - oh all right. All right, yes, you know, I always - I was always wi
lling to - you know, to have a go and - you know, they - they - they were always - you know, glad for anyone that would - do, you see, I didn't mind, I used to - but of course there's quite a lot of book keeping and of course - that - that wasn't my stron
g
 point at - at school, I wasn't - I wasn't all that good at - arithmetic and things like that, and it's very funny, all through my life I've had to do it quite a lot. I've got on with it but - it - it - it wouldn't have been what I would have chosen you k
n
ow, if - if I - I'd had my way. But - I never - I - I - the only prizes I - I won at school were - were for English. Now I always wanted to write. And - I used to - I used to get - I used to be - during - during the first world war - there used to be one 
p
erson out of every class and I was chosen for our class - to write - we used to write to prisoners of war, we used to write to interned sailors or - anybody that was interned you know in countries you see, and of course first of all, I - I used to write m
o
re or less what the teachers had said you know, then after a bit you know I thought, well, you know, a lot of these, they're only young men you know, 'cos I was only a kid myself, I was only about eleven or twelve, but - I used to think, well I don't thin
k
 they want to know all this, so I used to get my brothers to tell me all the local - football news and what have you, and you see I used to put all this in the - in the letters you see. And after a bit my letters weren't vetted they used to go straight aw
a
y you see in the first case they were - the teacher used to sort of read them out. Well of course, back used to come these replies and of course they - they were evidently what the fellows wanted to know. They - you know - they wanted to know - I mean, fo
r
 instance - if they happened to live in Chelsea - well naturally they were Chelsea fans you see and of course my brothers - I didn't know much about football or anything - like that, but you see they used to tell me these - various names you see and I use
d
 to put in, you know, so and so and so and so and they - they beat you know another team whatever it was you see, well then of course if the fellows - belonged to the team that they beat or - you know, what have you you know, they used to be more interest
e
d in them and I used to get the - used to get back no end of letters you see, well one - one day - when - they used to go to the school of course, didn't come to me, and - one day one; came and the teacher was reading this out you see so she said, oh, she
 
said, I didn't know you wrote about all these things. I said, well - I - I thought - I thought Miss that - you know, that's what they wanted you see. So she said, well - yes, I suppose so, but - she said - you want to keep a bit to other things you see. W
e
ll then - I remember once - we - of course you wouldn't remember but you've probably heard of it, there was a very - famous escape from the submarine E13, the - well - the Captain o this you see, that - that escaped, you see, he got to London, he was deco
rated by - the Queen, well - strangely enough I suppose - way back in his mind he thought, well - I'll go}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
to that school, you know, and see - you see, so he came to the school and he saw the headmistress, he said, now, he said, I want to see the little girl
 that - you - that wrote and kept up the morale of our men you know, because being an officer he was treated - you know, rather - and being interned it wasn't quite so bad as being in a prison camp, apart from they didn't have their freedom you see. And -
 
so of course I was brought forward you see. So he said, now you can ask me anything you like, and he'd just come from the investiture at Buckingham Palace. So I said, well what I would really like to know is, how you really did escape. Not what I've read 
a
bout, what you really did. And he burst out laughing and he told me. And he asked the headmistress if he could take me out to tea. And - of course he was a man about thirty - odd you know, any rate he took me out to tea and - had quite a nice - nice time,
 
but - but he - he told the headmistress then - he said, well, he said, you know, he said, it's very strange, he said, because, he said, I thought it was a young - you know, a - a sort of - well I suppose a - a sort of - different type of school you know, 
a
nd he thought I was about seventeen, you see, by my letters you see, he thought I was one of these young ladies, this school, and when he found out I was quite a little girl and - I was never very big for my age you know and I looked a little girl, he was
 
- he was most surprised, but he said that really and truly, the things that in my childish way I - you know, interested me I suppose, were - he said really were really more or less the things that they - they really wanted to hear you know. And it sort of
 
made them feel that, you know, people were - you know, interested. So of course the headmistress give me a look you know and of course after that I was allowed to - I - still went on writing you know and then we used to save up - save up so much money, an
d
 then we used to send - little things out you know, and of course I used to say to them, now, next time you write just say just what you do want, you know, and - you - you - you write and tell me and of course some of the things they asked for - would - w
o
uld sound silly to some people, but it's what they - what they wanted, what they missed you see, what they missed you know, because they weren't - as I say, they weren't like the - we did write to some - prisoners of war, who were - you know, had to exist
 
on Red Cross parcels and things like that, but the interned men weren't - weren't sort of - bodily - you know, I mean they - they had sufficient food and that sort of thing, and I believe the - Danes or wherever it was where they were interned - I believe
 
they were quite good to them, you know, but of course as I say they - they had no freedom you see and - you know, that was it, until they escaped and - I think - I think sometimes, you know, they - they almost turned a blind eye you know, in - in things o
f
 that kind. But you see with the - with the German - prisoners of war, of course - things were very different and - and one had to be very careful, and then of course you see - another thing - their - their letters - they couldn't be quite so - free in - 
i
n things and then you never knew whether you - really going to get the letters, or whether the letters were going to get through, and the more - you didn't know whether your parcels would - get through, you see, although the headmistress used to - seek th
e
 advice of the Post Office and - people like that and all sorts of things, but you see a lot of things apart from the Red Cross didn't get through. And often the Red Cross things didn't get through, so that - you know, the whole thing was a waste of time.
 
Every - Wednesday towards the latter end of the - not the latter end - the - middle of the - war - while I was still at school - we used to - used to go to Lord Robert's Memorial - place, it's still there, the - the workshop I mean in the Brompton Road, i
t
's still in the same place, and we used to roll bandages. Make bandages and, you know, little things like that we used to do for the war effort, but we used to like to do that because you see we got - you got a couple of hours off from school you see. Use
d
 to go - used to go after lunch break on the Wednesday and then we didn't have to go back you see. We didn't have to go back but we had to sort of - book in at this place you know to see we didn't go off on our won, and stop there and do these bandages or
 
whatever they wanted us to do, it was mostly roll bandages, and things of that kind, which stood as - and that was - and that was - you know that was part of our war effort, about six of us older girls used to go and do that every week. And then - occasio
nally, about once a month we used to go up to St Dunstan}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
s and we used to push out the blind - men in the - in the wheelchairs. And - and that was another thing where we got the time off from school you see. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 There were lots of things going on then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, lots of things going on, oh yes, there - there - there were really, but of course you see, as a - as child I mean you think, oh well - you know, it's - it's nice to get off to school, 'cos the same as - when we - when we used to have natu
ral history lessons you see, we were really very lucky at our little school, because they used to take us to the natural history museum you see, I mean, if it was - if it was - on butterflies and - and things like that, well - I mean the ordinary - ordina
r
y class I mean, the - the - the most they could get you would be books about it, but there, you see, you got drawers and drawers of every type of, you know, and of course as I knew the natural history museum like the back of me hand, having gone there as 
a
 small child and taken the children there on wet days and what have you I knew the places better than the teachers you see so - I'm afraid, once or twice - I and one or two of the older girls, used to give the teachers the slip because - we knew where we 
c
ould find them you see and we used to clear off on our own. I don't know what we - what we got out of it but - you know, we - we could always go there and - and - and bring the trays of butterflies - but the only thing is, now they - they used to; try and
 - do us out of that you see, when we got back to school - we used to have to write an essay - on what we did, you see. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 And you wouldn't be able to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh - oh well I did, I - because I mean I knew fairly well, you know, what was goin
g on, and then - once now and again the highlights of - of a our - our life was I think it was some lady that was connected with the school, she had a coach - sent for us and we did a tour of the cottages, Oxford and Cambridge. Well of course the same thi
n
g applied, we had to - write an essay when we got back, and of course I - I never - I never had any difficulty in writing an essay, you see, and I used to sort of try and memorize it in - always remember all the various colleges you know, I mean, didn't r
e
member them all by name but - I remember something about them, and I used to put this down and then of course this was all read out to the class and then - whoever had organised this used to all - well that was very good, well then there used to be a priz
e
s allotted you see, which I generally won, for - for that you know. That - that - that was my - sort of strong point, but I wasn't very hot on - arithmetic as I say, and - and wasn't very good at needle - well - really wasn't very good at any - oh I liked
 history, history was another strong point of mine, I was pretty good on history, not too bad on geography.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have good teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - yes, they're very old teachers you know, well - I mean, to us children they were old, they were in thei
r - fifties most of them you know. You didn't have many - many young teachers in those days. But then - you see, they had a lot to do you see, they had big classes, there would only be - there was the headmistress and there'd only be - at the most - four 
t
eachers you see to take all the various classes you see so they used to have to overlap - you know, used to have history and what have you in the morning, then in the afternoon it would be - needlework and - perhaps painting you know, when - when we could
,
 you know - when - but you see they - they were considered - painting wasn't considered - a necessity the same as - history or geography was you see, it was a - you know, that was more for the - you know the - other schools, you know, to take on, you know
, that wasn't reckoned to be very much good to any of us you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You said that there were other schools in this area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes. Yes, my - my brother, when - of course they only took - they only took children up - boys up to seven in our sch
ool, it was really a girls school but they took little boys up to seven and - and - then he went to what they called Bowsfield school, which is still - is still going, it's a - it's - it's very - it's in the Boltons, do you know the Boltons? Yes, well it'
s
 in the Boltons and that's very modern school now, but it was in Clairville Grove in those days, it was round the corner. And - then there was - there was the Marborough, which is still there - which is quite a big school, and then there was another - ano
t
her school, also a church school, Holy Trinity, but that was in - in Sloane Street. That was at the back of Sloane Street. That's still there, that's still functions, and then of course there was for Catholic children there was the Oratory school. And the
n there was St Josephs just up the road here, oh yes, we were very - very well off for - for schools really, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did the children you went to school with come from similar homes to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes. It - it - yes, except that - of course round near
 us there were all these little mews places which of course - in - in the - in the very early days of course they were - they were - the coachmen, you know, they - the ladies have carriages and what have you, well then of course as they - gradually, you k
n
ow, as the time got on it got to cars you see, and they were chauffeurs - the children you see, and - you know, that - that - that made up you see, that made up the - the school - you see, that's why we had rather a floating - population as it were you se
e
 because - a lot of these children, you see, if their people - you know, they obviously had to go to the country or - go to various places you see, well sometimes they'd be away - perhaps for three months you see, perhaps people would go to Scotland or so
m
ething you see. Well children couldn't - miss school for six months you - three months at a time, so they used to have to get to - you know, I used to feel sorry for these kids you see, but they used to come back to us - when they came back to the - mews,
 
you know - you know to the London house you see. But - but most of the other children were - were people, you know, like - like myself, that lived - lived locally all the year you know and - and - and went there but - we - you know, we had quite a mixed -
 crowd of children otherwise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were there any gangs or things like that at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh no, not really. No. Of course we had - we had quite a few costermongers children because there were lots - there was a - a sort of market as I've told you, j
ust near here, and - and quite - quite a lot of those - and of course we - oh - we got on very well because the costermongers - children, one of the - the girls, I see her now often you know, we often have a laugh, she's still got a stall as a matter - of
 
fact she carried on - with it, and she used to just say to her father, you know, oh dad, come on, you know, and - from the playground we used to climb up the top of the railings you see and of course he used to hand out a hand of bananas which would be ab
o
ut twenty you know on a - you know, and - and - and of course we - we - we used to get into trouble because sometimes - the poor man, she'd spot her father you see going out with the barrow - just before we were due back to school, 'cos they used to ring 
a
 bell you see and you had to be back in your desk you see after play-time at certain time you see, and of course perhaps he'd - so of course, there we'd be trying to stuff this - banana or what have you - you know, down our necks you see before we got int
o
 school, and sometimes you see some of the kids couldn't manage it you see and they'd go in you see and then they - they'd have this banana you know half - perhaps the top of it eaten underneath the desk you see and then they - they take them and then of 
c
ourse the eagle eye of the teacher would suddenly spot them. They'd be called out and - where did - because they knew we couldn't have got them - gone out and bought them because there wasn't sufficient time you see, and there wasn't the shops anyway, not
 
there. But - and then all of a sudden then this - this girl who'd get up you see and she said, well she said, my dad, you know, you see. So any rate - I know one terrible day - two or three of these bananas were confiscated you see, I - I expect we'd have
 
- they'd have got them back afterwards. You know. Any rate - this girl that - whose father was a - the costermonger - hers got taken as well you see, of course she was most indignant. Well anyhow her father came up to the school - and of course he wanted 
t
o see the teacher who'd pinched these kids bananas. Any rate, I think - I - I don't know what he would have done or - I don't suppose he'd have done anything but - you know, he was making a rare scene, it was a huge great man, and - eventually got a bit q
u
ietened and - afterwards the bananas were - were - were put back you know but - oh - she was - most indignant about it and of course we were - we were all for the girl of course you know, we were - we were - we were all - we were all against the teacher o
f course but - that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What were the teachers like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh they were - I suppose they were all right you know, they - they could be very strict, well they were rather strict in those days really you know, but what I used to have, if - if you di
d anything wrong you know - and - they used to sort of stand you up you see and then they'd say - you know, well, have to punish you, you see, and you'd think to yourself, oh well all right, I'll get a wallop you know on the hand you know and that sort of
 
thing. No. No, I won't cane you, you can write five hundred lines, well that used to annoy me more than anything, I'd much rather have had - a cut you know, a - a - than - than stay in afterwards and write five hundred lines, which I thought was a - was a
 terrible way of - of - of doing things but - oh on the whole I suppose they weren't too bad really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were they very hot on things like punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yes. Used to get black marks you see and if you got a - black mark three mornin
gs running - you had to - what they call go to the headmistress room which she was - she was a very - she - well she's a dear - a dear old soul really, but she was very similar to Queen Victoria to look at, dressed like her too you know. And - always in b
l
ack, and - you know - little portly - old lady, was quite elderly, and - and to go there you know - it was - it - it was, you know, it sort of - you - you really - you really felt, you know, that you were criminals, you know, they made you feel like that,
 
to go to the headmistress' room, to have to go to report to the headmistress' room, that - you know - that - the teacher had sent you there, she knew that you must have done something, you know, and I know one day I was sent out - I wasn't very often but 
I
 was this day, the teacher had gone out of the room you see and - of course kid like we all started talking you see. So when she come back she rapped on the - desk you see, so she said, hands up all those who was talking. Well I put me hand up straight aw
a
y, and when I looked round nobody else put their hands up, you see, so I said, well I wasn't talking to myself, like that. So she said, how dare you be so rude, so insolent, she didn't like me. So she brought me out in front of the class, she said, go dow
n
 to - Hiss Blackmore at once, that was the headmistress. Go down at once, she said. And - 'course I looked round you see, quite expecting some of my pals - 'cos I think everybody in the class was talking, I mean it was real hullabaloo you know, any rate, 
I
 thought, oh, all right, see, so of course I went very indignant, you know, to - you know and knocked on the door you see. So of course she looked at me, so she looked a bit surprised, so she said, come in. So she was very quiet you know, see so I thought
,
 oh crumbs, you you know, another blooming lecture I suppose, see, so she says, sit down. So - I sat down, see, so she said, now what is this all about, I said, well it's like this. And I started telling her what had happened. I said, when Miss Walters we
n
t out of the room - I said, we sat - we - we started talking. So she said, who? So I said, oh well, nearly all of us you know. You see, I said, and when she come back she said, hands up those who've been talking. I said, well I put me hand up, I had been 
t
alking, and I said I looked round, nobody else put their hands up, so I said, well, I - I wasn't - I didn't say I wasn't the only one, I said, I wasn't talking to myself. So - she sort of looked at me you know, I - I thought, oh I suppose she's going to t
e
ll me I'm rude, so she turned round so she said - well, no, I suppose you weren't talking to yourself. So I - so she said, well who were you talking to? So I said, oh well, I said - they know who - who they were. I said, I know they who they were, I said,
 
and - I said, there were several of them. I said, - so she said, well won't you tell me their names? I said, oh no, it's not for me to tell you their names. I said - I know I was talking and I put me hand up. I said, and - I said, I've been sent - sent he
r
e and I said, I don't think it's fair. You see. And she turns round and says - I shall never forget it - so she says, no, I don't think it's fair either, you see. And I was so amazed I nearly passed out you see. So she said - she said to me, now, she said
,
 go to my little cupboard, she said, and - make a pot of tea. See, so I thought, oh the old girl's elevenses you see. So I went and I made this tea so she said, now - in that cupboard - she had a little cupboard, little corner cupboard like I've got there
,
 she says, now - get out two cups and saucers, see, so I thought, oh she's going to have a teacher down here for tea. So I got out the tea - so she said, and you'll find a tin in there, she still sat where she was and giving me these orders, she says, you
'
ll find a tin in there with some biscuits in, bring it out. So - pulled up a little table you see, so I put this all ready you see, so - so I said, shall I make the tea now, the water's boiling? So she said, yes. So I made the tea. So - and she got a litt
le tea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
cosy and I put that on, and so - I prepared to go see, so - so I said, oh are you going to send for Miss Walters? So she says, no, I'm not. Sit down. So I sat down. So she said, now, pour it out child. So - I poured it out see, and I said, do you hav
e sugar? I think she said yes. So she says, now - put your own in. And - and I sat there - and of course it's the one and only time I'd ever had tea with the headmistress, and it - 'course I was sent down there for punishment you see, and of course - in t
he meantime - the other girls, you know, the - the - my mates like that had been talking I think were - were getting - qualms you know, about - because I'd been there such a long time you see and I suppose they t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 hought, oh well, it's a bit rott}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 en if she - s
he has - a caning you know. So - I think one by one they got up and they said to the teacher, well, we think perhaps - as we were speaking we'd be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ter go down. So she said, no, she said, but you can all take - you know, all do - five hundred, that was her 
usual, five hundred lines you see, they went back very crestfallen. Well - this went on for about half an hour, this business you know of the tea business you see. So she says, now, she says, you can go back to your class, she said, and, she said, and I'l
l
 see Miss Walters later on. So she said, and - she said, there's one thing, she said, I - I will say for you, she said, I know some - times you're naughty, she said, but you're very truthful, you see. So she said, now I want you to always remember to try 
a
nd be truthful you see. So I said, well yes, I - I am, so she said, yes, I know you are, but she said, I want you to remember it, she said, because, she said, there's lots of things, she said, that we can - we can cure, she said. But she said - if one - i
s untruthful when you're you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 ng, she said, it - it gets a hab}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
it, she said, and it's one of the things that is - is very very difficult to cure later on in life. And I never forgot it. And - so she says, so - then I - I turned round see, so I said, oh, I said
, do you want me to write out some lines? Like that. So she says, no. So she said, no, she said, you've had your punishment, you see, so I didn't - I didn't - anyway I went back very perkily to the - you know, came into the room you see. So - so she said,
 
you can go to your place. So I went to my place and of course I could tell they were all - you know, and they were all looking at me and they thought, oh she don't look as if she's been crying, you know, she don't look as if she's been hurt you know, and 
t
hey were all, you know, and my mate in the desk next to me, you know, she was sort of, you know, trying to edge forward you know, enough to say - you know - silence, silence, you know and then we went on with the lesson, well then - we had the break you s
e
e. Of course they were all clustered round me you know to know what had happened you see So - they said, well - what did you get? You know. So I said, well, I didn't get anything. See? So they said, oh I suppose you had a jawing, oh - then another girl, s
a
id, oh I can't - couldn't stand that, she said, I - I'd rather have - I'd rather have two or three cuts with the - with the cane than a - than a jawing to. I said, no, I didn't get a jawing to either, you see. So I says, as a matter of fact, I said, I - I
 
made the tea and - had a cup of tea. And do you know honestly I'm sure they never believed me to this day you know. But - that was my - my way. But I will say that, she was a very very strict person, this headmistress, in - like normal things you know. Bu
t
 she was also - very fair. Very fair person you know, and she would listen to your side which - I mean, I'll admit I wasn't always right and probably I shouldn't have said, oh well I wasn't talking to my - but I was so wild, to think that - you know, I me
an, after all it was obvious I couldn't have been making all the noise that went on, and - you see, I was so cross because - you know, that - that -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you think the teacher singled out anybody for particular attention?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, I don't know. I don
't know, I - I - I suppose you know I was as mischievous as - as the next person you know but I - I don't think I was - I was definitely a - a bad influence you know, not - not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old were you when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you have stayed on longer if you'd have had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Oh yes, if I - I had - I actually won a scholarship but I wasn't able to - take it up, because it would have meant that I'd had to stop at school 'til I was at last eighteen, you se
e, and - it - of course in those days - I think the grant was terribly small, it was about five pound a year, you see, and it would hardly have paid for my clothes. And I - it was - it was a scholarship that took me away from home, you see, that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where would you have gone?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
It was the Lincoln, what they call the Lincoln Scholarship, my name is - was still on the board at school when the school was there you know as having won it you know. But that was for - that was for - essay writing, that was 
for English, it - it - it was - it was to go to a school for that purpose you see. So probably, if I'd have been able to have - you know - you know, sort of - taken it up - I probably might have realised an ambition, I might have been able to have written
,
 you see, that would - that was the thing I liked. You see, when I was ten I did win - win a - an essay, and I got ten pound which was - you know, colossal in those days you see. Oh I think it - it - it did - did clothes for all of us for I don't know how
 
long, you know, this ten pound, I - I think some was put into the bank and - or Post Office you know, and - the rest was spent, but - I think it gave me ideas that I might, you know - and I'll tell you another thing that I - I remember doing when I was el
e
ven, that was - we - we had - I - I - I won for the - Admiral Nelson, it was the - about Nelson, it was the Navy League. And - you had to write - an essay, on - on Nelson. And strangely enough I never knew it and I never ever looked it up but after I'd wr
itten it - my father was looking through a lot of books because we always used to have - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 encyclopaedias}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
, he was a great believer in - you know, in }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 encyclopaedias}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
, you know, these big bound books and you know, we always had to look at them with - washed hand
s and what have you, you know. But - he actually had - the life of Nelson by somebody and I never ever knew about it. Any rate, what I wrote about Nelson was entirely a child's - you know, view, and - and bits that - that I knew, you know, I mean I knew h
e
 was a sailor and - you know - I knew what he'd done, what he'd achieved you know. But I mean I didn't know anything - actually, I mean I never read this book you know, 'til afterwards. But - at the end - after I had written the composition, you know, you
 have these - foolscap, you know, you have to write so many hundred words, you know, or try to. And - a - a piece of poetry kept going through my mind, and - I - I don't know if you've ever heard it, it goes like th}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 is; Wherev}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 r a noble deed is wrought, wherev}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
er is spoken a noble thought, our hearts in glad surprise to higher levels rise. Then it goes on; Honour to those whose works or deeds, does help us in their daily need, And by their overflow raise us from what is low. I believe there was another verse b
ut I can't remember, but those words have always stuck in my mind. Well, I wrote those on the - the new page that I couldn't think of anything e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 se to write at the end of it and thought no more about it. Well - everybody in the school took part in this - y
ou know, this - from the Navy League you see, they sent round this thing you see. Well - and all the school - well - I should think forty or fifty schools in London - participated in this you see, it was a big thing you see, and the prizes were - were to 
b
e awarded for this thing at what is now, it used to be the Royal Palace Hotel but now I think they call it the Royal Garden Hotel, well - that was where they'd - they'd - they'd got this room and all these, you know, people from the Navy League - all Admi
r
als and what have you were all assembled to present these prizes you see. Well - about a week before - it was read out that I'd won the prize for our school, you know, out of all the entries from our school, I'd won it from our school. Well of course I kn
e
w there would be several other schools, so one of the teachers - this very teacher that - tried to get me into trouble before, she didn't really like me but of course - she didn't mind me then because I was going to represent the school, and - and I was -
 
I was rather small for my age, I - you know, I mean, at eleven I probably looked about nine you know, and - any rate, she was - in charge of me to go - you know, to - see that I formed up with this, well then when we got there - was crowds of various peop
l
e, but they were nearly all boys, they'd come from boys school and some of 'em were about sixteen years old you know, they were the - top form boys you know, I think I - I don't know whether I was the only girl but - there were very few girls, they were n
e
arly all boys there, there were about twenty - so you know from all the various schools you see. Well there's a great lanky boy, you know, next to me, so he said, hullo titch, what are you here for? You see. Well of course that got up my nose because I wa
s
 there - I'd won a prize as well as him you see. And - so - I said, well I might ask you the same, you see. So he said, oh well, he said - I - I - I've won the - the - the Navy League prize you see. I said, yes, but only for your school. I said, I've won 
i
t for our school. So he said, oh he said, they didn't tell me they were doing the infants. I said, I'm not in the infants. You see. Well we had a - more or less a bit of a row you know, about this, any rate - when the - when it came up you see, this - he 
w
as - a Rear Admiral or somebody you know but of course he wasn't in his Navy uniform you know, and - and - and of course I think it was my first experience of seeing anybody with a beard, you know, you still got - Naval beard you know, and there were seve
r
al people on the platform and - oh I think Princess Marie Louise, there was - it was quite a big do you know, and of course - the people that had sponsored you you know, the teachers and that were all sitting in the front, you know, watching to see you - 
y
ou know, you didn't - put a - wrong note anywhere, and - and of course - I suppose he - he'd had such a procession of - of boys, you know, like coming up and he was presenting these various - books, you know - prizes to them and I think there was a money 
p
rize as well, and of course - when he come to me all of a sudden you see I suppose you see he was sitting up on a sort of a raised sort of a platform you see and he was rather a big man, tall man you see, and of course as - as I walked up you know, I supp
o
se he thought I'd strayed into the wrong place, so he says to me, what do you want, little girl? You see. So I said, oh please, I've come for my prize you see. So then he read my name out, which was rather an unusual name you see, my full name which of co
u
rse I always had to put you know at school, and - so he said, oh, he said - have you - have you - have you written this? So I said, yes. You see. So he said, oh, he said, you're a very little girl aren't you? I said, well Nelson wasn't very big was he? An
d
 with that they all started laughing, and as I looked I could see this teacher in front going like this you know, and I thought, well he was, he was - he was a very small man. You know, I was reading the other day and they said that - he - I - - in - in o
n
e of - Naval Colleges or something they've got a uniform of Nelson's and they said when you looked at it, it - it looked like a - almost like a child's, yes, because he was - so - so I turned round, so he said - by George, he said, she's right, he said, y
e
s, he was. So I said, well he did quite a lot didn't he? So he said, yes. So he said - so then - and then to my surprise he read out those words - I've written to you. So he said, well - he said, I think for anybody as young as you - to - he said, what ma
d
e you put that? I said, well - I think - you know, apart from any - being a good sailor, I said, I think that - that those words - those words seem to me to be - you know, the appropriate thing to put for him. So he said, yes, and I think so too, he said.
 
And nobody else had put that you see, they'd - they'd written the essay, probably written better essay than I had you know, or more informative you see, but what I'd written was simply - things I knew. And of course, one thing I did know, Nelson was alway
s
 very seasick. Yes. And he never ever got over it. Which they say is - is something - rather surprising and I believe there was some - very big - Naval man not so long ago - that - went in submarines, and - and he said afterwards, he said that all his lif
e he'd been plagued with seasickness and - and they were so surprised when he - went into the Navy you know, but he did. But he never - he said - it's something that }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 
you - you either do get rid of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 or you don't you know, but they say Nelson never did - get r
id of, so - I think it was all the more wonderful - to think that - that he did and planned what he did and - and got over it you know. But I - I know this - any rate, when - when - when I'd passed on and got me - prize you know and of course I met that -
 
I met this boys again so he said - oh, he said, so - you know, 'cos he told these other boys you see, and so he said, let's have a look at your prize. So when he had a look at it you see so he said, he says, where did you crib that - that poem from? So I 
s
aid, well I don't know, I must have read it somewhere, I said, I didn't make it up if that's what you mean. So he says, no, so he said, ain't she a titch, he says, fancy her being in. You see. So he says, how old are you? So I said, oh I don't know, I'm n
o
t that much of a titch, I'm eleven. You see. So - you know, these others looked at me and of course when I - when I think back, must have been - you know - a peculiar position you know that - but any rate I - I got it, and that's and I think - I think rea
l
ly when they judged I think that's probably what they judged me on, you know, I don't know. Any rate, for a long time at school I got - oh you know, I was - I was quite - you know - yes, oh quite - for - for writing, for - but I - I don't ever remember do
i
ng anything much - but you see, it came - it came easy to me. I - I think I have - what they call a rather a retentive memory you know and I - if I hear things once you know, I can hear them, somewhere at the back of my mind and - and it comes up. And I'l
l
 tell you another peculiar thing, I don't know if it's ever happened to you - it may have done, but - if I go to a place - that I don't realize, you know - to my knowledge I've never been to before, all of a sudden something happens and I think to myself,
 
oh I know - I - I know what this place is. And I know round the corner there'll be so and so - Now, to my knowledge, I've not been there before, but - something - way back - tells me that there's something there. Now - there must be some pre - ordained - 
y
ou know - yes, there must be, because - what - whatever I've thought of in my mind is there. And yet to my - you know, actually - I mean if anybody had said, you know, have you been - like named a certain place, I said, oh no, I've never been there, you -
 
well not that I know of, well then - probably - when I've got back and I've - I've talked to my mother about it, yes, well you did go there but you were only two. Or - or something like that you know. But - something, it - it seems to - it seems to come, 
it - it's very - could be - could be.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have many books in the house at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh I was always reading. And - you know, that's another funny thing. Now, my father as I told you was nearly a hundred, he never wore glasses, my mother was nine
ty-one when she died, she never wore glasses. My grandmother way back - and I think I'm the only one in the whole of the family that's ever worn glasses. And do you know, I think what I did, I think I tried my sight - too much, you see, because you see, a
s
 I say I used to - do the various chores, put the kids to bed and what have you you know, well then probably, especially in the winter it would bet getting dark you see, and of course we - we had no electric light in those days, we used to have - we used 
t
o have lamps which were very - very very good, they were really lovely lights but before the lamps were lit - I used to be very keen on reading, and I think I used to - I - I probably tried my - tried my eyes, I think that's what I must have done, because
 - I - it's not hereditary you see, be - not in any way, and I'm the only one, I - I've worn glasses since I was - about eleven, eleven years old, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father or you mother ever read to you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh mum used to read to us, oh yes, mum used to read to us, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh well, I mean story books in the beginning you know and then we'd progress a bit you know to something a little - but - you know, what - what you - you'd call - good books you know - no novels or anything of that kind you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were there many books or magazines around the house that your father or mother used to read?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh of course my father always had cycling and what have you which was - we never took much interest in. But, as I say, he alway
s had this whole - set of encyclopaedias. You see, and anything - and if I used to read - and another thing I used to do, you see, when I first started learning, you know how you - how you learn to - to - to try to spell or to - to read out a word, you se
e
, well often I'd read a word, well, I mean, I'd read it - you know, as - as it - as it was - it was printed which - which often wasn't the correct - pronunciation wise you see, well then I'd think to myself, oh - well, I must - I must look this up, you se
e, well then I'd go and I'd get a dictionary and I'd look it up and find out what it meant you see, well then I'd go over it syllab}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 le by syllable}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  'til I'd said that word you see, and I always liked to put a word in if I could you know. I - I was very fond o
f reading, oh yes, I used to go - I remember going to - 'cos we - when we lived in Westminster - we - were were - we weren't so fortunate as we are here, we used to have to go to - it's still there, at Buckingham Palace Road, for the - the that was the lo
c
al library in those days you see, and I used to go and of course it was a bus ride you see. Well - you could get on a bus for a penny, and as I say, you could take a child under five - you know, and sit on your lap, you know, and still go for the penny yo
u
 see. Well of course I used to - used to take this boy of course who always looked so much bigger than - you know, so much older than what he was 'cos he was such a - a fine child, went to the school when he was two and a half, so of course - was more kno
w
ledgeable than the average two and a half you see, sit him on my lap where by you could never see me and what with the books you know, and of course I used to get on and I used to - tender me penny you see. So he used to say, well, what about him? You see
,
 the bus - conductor used to say. Oh, I said, he's only two and a half, you see, so he'd look up, he'd say, yes, I am aren't I? You know. And of course he'd say it so sort of - cocky like you know that the bus driver would think, probably - conductor woul
d
 think it was a put up job but of course he used to let me - let me go you see. Well then - you see, perhaps - one of the books would be on his - lap you see - that I - I used to change about three at a time, and you see and he'd got one and there'd be pi
c
tures perhaps in them, you know, maybe story books you see, and - he'd be, you know, on the journey, he'd be - he'd be looking at them you see and the conductor would say, what's that? And of course he could tell him you see and he said, yes, look, it say
s
 so and so you see. So I suppose the conductor used to think to himself, crikey, two and a half years old kid and he - looking at the pictures and - you see - you see, but he could really read, small things like that, 'cos I taught him you see. And he act
ually did go to school, mind you they didn't do anything.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Have you ever had any regrets about your education at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not really. Not really. I - I often wished I - I was able - you know, to have been better educated, but sometimes, as I say - wh
en - when I hear some of the - so called better educated I think I didn't do so badly really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 You think you benefi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ted from attending school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, yes, yes. Also night school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you remember if there were any children left o
n their own during classes or playtime or anything, do you ever remember children who were always on their own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not very often, not in our school. Oh no, we were very - you know, very sort of matey, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When you first went to school who took you there, would you go on your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, I always - you know, I suppose my mother must have taken me in the first place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say that the school was quite handy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, it was - it was very near, and of course there were no
 - no roads, no awkward roads you know, no - no much traffic you see - mostly horses anyway in those days. And - so the mothers you know mostly liked their children to go to that school. And I used to collect, besides my own - you know - brothers, I used 
t
o collect other children for mothers that couldn't take them, and take them along to school, and take them to their various classrooms for which I got an extra - ten minutes because sometimes I'd have to go and fetch them and wait for them you know, 'til 
t
hey were ready and the same procedure you know bringing them back again. Oh yes, I was - I was - hardly ever went out without at least five children I should think you know. I mean, my own - own two or three and - you know - others tacked on behind you kn
o
w. But I mean that didn't - didn't make any - didn't mean anything to me I mean - two or three children was - was quite all right, and of course the - the parents were sure you see that they couldn't - they couldn't possibly get into any - any danger you 
k
now, not - not from the distance we went to. I - I - I think sometimes that once or twice we used to have - some - Roman Catholic children, but of course as it was a church school it was rather awkward because we did have religious - teaching, and we used
 to have a curate come from the church to give us scripture you see, I - I - I didn't do too badly at scripture lessons either, you see, so it was very awkward for the Catholic children, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did they have to go out of the room when they were on?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - no, the - the - it wasn't too bad, I mean, they just used to be there but of course - on various - saints days and what have you you see they used to be missing you see because their parents, if they were - good Catholics used to - you know, take
 them off on those days you know to various - things that weren't - we didn't have any JEWS I don't think at our school so we didn't - we didn't notice that sort of thing. But the - the Roman Catholic school was a little bit further away and it was - I me
a
n you - you - really if they were young children you really needed to take them yourself and fetch them you see, because the roads were a bit dangerous. I think that's why quite one or two used to start to come to our school but - they were very much in t
h
e minority you know, there were only about half a dozen I should think you know. And I think that was the reason that they came, you know, because of - of that - that yes. But other lessons were the same, it was just the scripture which was - you know I m
ean, it just had to be you see and we started - we started with prayers and we ended up with - with prayers you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What time did you start when you first started school, you started at two and a half didn't you, did you go to the nursery or somethin
g to begin with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh I didn't, no, it was my - my little brother that - no, he went to school simply because you see - I couldn't stop home to - to look after him, oh you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old were you when you started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Nearly five I think. Five was the accepted time, but I think I got in a little bit before, you know, they didn't mind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What hours would school be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Nine - nine 'til - I think it was half past three }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 fo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 r the tiny ones and four o'clock you know for us you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you have school dinners or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No. Oh no. Oh no. Oh no. That was - that was something - only what we called the very poor did, you see, in those days we didn't - you see, you - you - well I man it was - it was just one of those things, 
everybody - you know - and of course you had two - two hours - well practically two hours, you had an hour and three-quarters, from twelve o'clock was lunchtime 'til quarter to two, the bell went to get back, so it was an hour and three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 quarters, so you ha
d heaps of time 'cos you only had a few minutes - you know, walk from school. But as I say, the little ones - when this - what do you call it, restaurant - used to open up next door and of course they used to start cooking about eleven you see and of cour
s
e the children could smell, especially if it was cabbage or anything like that you know, and they could smell and they used to say - we'll have to hurry up because the dinner - the dinner will be ready, you see they could smell the dinner from the - from 
the school but one or two of the children - you know - used to stop, there - there were school dinners available, which I think were free in those days.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 They were only for the poor children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, I mean - I used to feel rather sorry for the chi
ldren that had school dinners because you know other children used to sort of rather look down on them you know, but - of course it was either - or either they may have had - parents that couldn't cope with them or something you know. It may have been - a
l
though of course as I say, the majority of - of working class - the women didn't go out to work in those days, but of course it may have been a case where the father couldn't - hadn't got any work you see, and - you know, it was - well better for the chil
dren to have a - a - on meal at school anyway you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You know people divide society into different groups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes. The class distinction sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What were the different groups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - there were the - the - sort of what - wh
at - what - what you call the working class which - which - which - which I think is - is - is - is a very good description, after all's said and done I mean - you do reckon to work or you have to work at - at something or another. Well then there were th
e
 - the - then it came to the sort of - business people. Then it went on to professional people, you see, if your father was a doctor or dentist or what have you I mean you were really - you were really in the top grade then. And I may tell you he had one 
o
r two - people like that at our school also, because you see it was so well thought of that - up to the age of - say twelve or - such an age, you see, the - the tuition was - was considered good enough, and then, if they so wanted, they could send their c
h
ild to a boarding school - you know, after - and a lot of them did that, a lot of them were quite - well, to us, you know, what we called the nobs you know, they were sort of better off. But, as children you see, children - are all the world over - there 
-
 there is no class distinction with children you see. You'll find that. The same as - I think half the troubles in the world could be cleared up - if it was left with children - and - and left in that way, because you see, there'd be no racial - there'd b
e
 no - no any - thing, because a child is a child and you see, children accept each other, you see, and - and another thing about children is, you see, they're very - they're very clever really, in finding out the wrong 'uns you know. Really and truly aren
'
t they. I mean, we - we all know that - that - that - that - in a group of children you're - you're bound to find one that - that - that wants to be - you know - a little more - perhaps courageous or do a little - something perhaps he shouldn't and that s
ort of thing, and you always find children that will follow someone like that there's always perhaps be a leader of some sort hasn't there. But - I think the average - average child is - is really - pretty - pretty cute really you know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What would your mother and father say if another child hit you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - well - first of - first of all they'd say, well what did you - did you - did you say anything to them? You see. Then you'd repeat the - the - what you'd said and what you didn't say you se
e, and that sort of thing you see, and they'd say, oh well - I think it was just - just as much your fault you see. But if it was an unprovoked - sort of attack you see, and of course we were very keen - I was as the eldest, on anybody attacking any of my
 
young - younger ones you see, and of course if - of course you always get a bully somewhere or other you see, and the best way the best way to cope with a bully is to - you know - to sort of give him as good as he gets you see. Well, it's very difficult i
f
 you're a girl, and a rather puny girl at that, but of course there's more way - there's more way than one - of getting back - at - at a boy, I mean - you don't have to rely on - on - power and blows and that sort of thing, there's other ways. And believe
 
- believe it or not I knew them. And - I - I - I think I could - I could cope. I don't think I was ever frightened of anything you know. I - I mean, if I was it was very much inside me you know and I would - like disguise it to the top, but - I - I - I th
ink I - I could stand up for myself pretty well in spite of everything. I think mother too got a shock about me really you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you ever bring friends home from school or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Oh yes, yes, quite often, yes. Yes. Oh yes. It wasn't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about birthdays, what would happen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, always used to reckon to - try and have a birthday party, even if - you know, we were really fairly hard up you know, but - we - we used to try, and as I say, I used to, you know
, try and - make things as - as nice as I could you know, and - and I always used to - always used - used to like to do as a child, of course it's done quite a lot now - nowadays, I always used to like to make little individual jellies and things. 'Cos in
 
- in my day I mean a child's party was - was - jellies, blancmanges, things like that, it's all gone out now I mean they want potato crisps and sausages on sticks and things like that you see, but in those days I mean - the idea of a child's party was bun
s
 - bread and jam sandwiches - perhaps a birthday cake and - things like jellies, blancmanges, things of that kind you see, and I used to make all these - these various - little jellies, you know, individual ones, that everybody - every child had it - its 
i
ndividual one, you see, and that used to go down much better believe me than a big bowl, which my mother would be inclined to make you see, and you have a couple of spoonfuls out put on - on your plate you see. You had your own, you had your own spoons, y
o
ur own things and - and that - that used to - be - and then I used to try and save up when there was one of the boys parties, not so much for my own, but when it was them because they were always smaller children of course and I used to save up so that - 
t
here used to be either an orange or an apple, by the side of the plate, for afterwards, and a little bag of sweets, then I used to divide little - you know, just little tiny - games, you know, that they could - have like - passing the - parcel along and t
h
ings like that kind you know, and - and of course - so that somebody had - well obviously in their only one can win each time, you know, the one where the parcel lands you see. So I used to make up little things, you know, very trivial little things, but 
s
o that - whether they'd won or not at the games, every child, before it left, after the party, had a little - something and I used to get - get - buy this sort of crepe paper stuff you know, and - make - make little - parcels of - of things tied up with t
h
is paper and - string or tape or something you know, pretty or - if it was for the girls used to try and find some of me - dolls things, hair ribbons and that sort of thing and tie up, and - everybody as they went out - they either had an orange to take h
o
me or an apple - after they'd had their tea and meal, and then either a little bag of sweets or a little tiny - parcel with - some little thing in you know, if it was - just a - that everybody had something. And do you know, it was very funny, I - I once 
h
eard - two or three very very young children - and - talking, and apparently there was another child in the street that had a birthday the same day as one of my little brothers you see. So they said, and they were both at the same time, we always used to 
r
eckon about three to four you know, mum said, you know, get the kids off quick you know - so, about three or half past three to four and of course you start teatime straight away you know. And - and these children were discussing - which they were going y
o
u see, so one little boy turned round and he said, well I'm going to the Home's party, 'cos he said, you always get something to bring away there, that'll be much better than going to that other party. So all the - nearly all the kids - by - boycotted the
 
other little boy whose birthday was the same day as my - I mean he had - he had his own people there and he had certain people there, but - these - these children that had been to our party, they would rather come to our party, not that we - we weren't so
 
well off as the - as the other people, you know, I mean my father - hadn't got so much as - as - as the - this other child's father had but - you see - they - they hadn't thought, I mean when - when the tea was over you'd had it, it was done, and they did
n
't play any games. You know, they just sort of sat there after the tea you know and - probably had a slice of cake you know, what have you, and - and I don't think they had such a big garden as we had where they could go out and - get off any excess you k
n
ow, and - for some reason or other ours were always very popular. Very popular. So that - you know, our - our parties were the things - although of course they - you know, they had to be composed of - yes, and - you know, but you - you see you - you had t
o
 think about it you see, I used to think about it two or three - days before it started you see and - get it ready, whereas the other poor woman probably you know, probably thought, oh - it's Jimmy's birthday or something today, oh well, I'll have to - do
 something you know and - and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have birthday cards and things like that in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Yes, you had birthdays cards. And of course Easter was - was quite a - quite a nice time. You know, for - for children, yes. Oh yes. Yes, we used to have Easter and Easter eggs and things -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Chocolate bunnies and things?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - not very often, sometimes - some members of the family used to suddenly - remember that we belonged to them you know and used to send to us, but mostly it was
 only cards you know. But another thing I remember right from my very early - when I could - first learn to write - even if it was a card that was sent for your birthday or Christmas or anything my mother always made us write and thank, always. Always. An
d
 of course the - boys, you know, they were mostly too young to write so that - right from - right from very early age, I mean I was clobbered with writing to everybody, didn't matter who it was and if it was just a card I would write and thank them for it
,
 that was one of the things - and it's one of the few things that is done today. As a matter of fact I think - I'm one of the very few people that write loads of letters. I don't think there's a day goes by without I don't write a letter to somebody and w
h
en I write a letter I write a letter. Actually I've got airmail stationery so, you - you can guess I can - I write but - you see, nowadays - of course I suppose it's the phone and everything you know that's so easy. But, you know, I still think that there
'
s a lot - a lot to be said for getting a letter. And you know, I think if - if more people realized, you know, the - the thrill it sometimes gives older people, you now, to get letters. I'm - sure they would write more often. Oh no only older people, any 
-
 any - I think everybody more or less likes to get letters you know. Don't they, don't you think so. And - and it is more or less dying out. You know, to what it was. Of - of course, as I say, the - he postage is a bit of a - that - that's why I think tha
t
, you know, people like myself now I suppose I would spend what - three shillings a week easily on stamps, and if - when I - it - when it comes to airmails you see - quite a lot more, and I write - I write an airmail at least once a month, probably - more
 often. And probably to two or three places as well you see. Oh Christmas - Christmas time here is - is - it's - it's really lovely, I had eighty - three I think last year, and I think I had them from all corners of the world.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have many Christmas cards when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, quite a lot of Christmas cards, oh yes, yes. Yes, of course Christmas - you know, like everything else was - was - was - very cheap, and - oh yes, we thought it was the thing to do, oh yes, we used to write to ou
r - friends and - what have you you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you get many relatives round during the rest of the year, apart from Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, not - not really 'cos as I say, we - we didn't have many that lived very near, and - you know, we - we weren't - 
you know, we weren't really - there were - they - they were only interested if we were, you know, now one of my aunts was interested about me because she was my godmother well of course she came to see me confirmed you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh I was about fourteen before I was confirmed, I - I was confirmed in - the church is still there but it's no longer used as one of our}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  churches, I think the - the Ro}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 manian or - or - or somebody like that sect have got it now, it - it - I'll tell 
you where it is, it - it was All Saints church, it's still called All Saints, in Ennismore Gardens, that's at the top of Knightsbridge by Kingston House there, and I was - I was - what do you call it - what did I say, confirmed by the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  - one of the Bishops of Kensing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
ton. And in earlier years he'd confirmed my mother at - but it may not have been the same Bishop you know - of Kensington and they were - they were - and - and why that was rather - rather a - a very fashionable in those days, because every Sunda
y morning, the - Lifeguards band used to - used to march to the church and play - there you see, which was rather an innovation in those days you see, and it was very fashionable church - and all the way round there were all these because - it wasn't only
 
- it was the - when the confirmation was given, they only had one every so often, you know, so many years, and there were quite a lot of - you know - of the nobility's children confirmed at the same time and there were all these - like lovely carriages an
d - and things outside you know waiting, and I think my - the aunt that was my godmother - was - you know, that had gone up in the world a bit was - was very very impressed, very impressed.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it possible to move up in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes, 
I suppose it - I - I suppose it was you know, it was - you know, it was one of those things, but I can always remember a saying of my mother's, you know - you don't want to be - be poor and look poor. That was another saying of hers. Which - which - you s
e
e - you - you see, that was her attitude. You - you no need - you no need to go about - a sort of - almost in rags and what - what - this, that and the other, there was no need for that, I mean, you - you probably couldn't afford new clothes but you could
 always mend and you could always do things to clothes you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What did she think about you getting dirty when you went out and played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, I mean the normal sort - well - well then, I - I mostly coped with - you know, mum didn't have much 
to do - you know, I mean - of course they - they were always nagging me, you know, oh you're always washing us, you know, and you're always doing this, I said, well you shouldn't get dirty should you. But - the little ones complaint was he had this lovely
 
golden curly hair, and you see everybody used to say, oh hello curly, you see, but of course what - what used to annoy him, the dust man and the coalman particularly - in those days used to do it you see, so he - he said to the coalman one day, he said, h
e
 said, I don't want you to keep on - rubbing my hair and calling me curly. So he said, ah, what's the matter with you curly, you're generally, you know, so bright - 'cos he was a - a very happy child. So he said, ah, he said, but my sister washes my hair 
every }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 time, he said. So he says, oh, You}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
'll put me gloves on next time, you know, and laughed. But - of course I used to, I used to probably - wash his hair probably every day. You know, every - like night you know, before he went to bed, because - being th
is lovely gold, I mean, you know, you - you just didn't people's -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father ever help with doing things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh he would do, he would do, oh yes, he - he - he - oh yes, he would do, he'd - he'd - he'd put his hand to anything you k
now, oh yes, dad was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How about doing repairs to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, he was - he was very - very - very handy, and of course as I say he had - such a lot of enforced - free time you know. Well, the same as my uncle that lived with us yo
u know, the musician, of course he wasn't always - in jobs - naturally you see, and - no, I think we were very lucky, on the whole, you know, as children because you see we had - we had that sort of atmosphere around us all the time you see. And - you see
,
 I mean, if - if we had a lucky stroke or anything you know well then, we - we all sort of shared, you know what I mean, it was - it was just one of those things and - and that was it. But, where my mother, you know, if - if - if - if dad had been extra -
 
you know, had extra jobs and that sort of thing and - and got a little more you see, my mother would - he'd give, of course, so much to mother but he'd keep - naturally some for himself, but - where my mother would put all hers probably by you know, think
i
ng of, you know like later - later on when there wouldn't be so much, my father would - you see, that's - that's where mum and dad used to have little argument, my father would go and he'd probably - give us - give us sixpence each or something like that 
you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You used to get three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 pence on average a week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Yes. Well I used to, the boys used to get tuppence and the little one a penny you see. Well - dad would give sixpence each and probably give me a shilling you see. Well I would immediately -
 go to mum, you see, and I'd say, well look, you'd better have this mum, because, you know - the boys'll be wanting so and so, you know, this can go towards so and so you see, but my father would give it me to spend on myself - or expect me to spend it on
 
myself, which I didn't. But - he would expect me to, you see, he was - he was like that you see, if he had extra money everybody had to - had to sort of share it. Whereas mum would think more of the - you see, mum - my - my father was more - what shall yo
u
 call it - well he - he would have been extravagant if he's had got the money, you know what I mean. You see, and he - as I say, he didn't have a very happy childhood himself - and - you know, he - he - he was determined we should have one, but - my - my 
mother always said that he went the wrong way, he - he rather spoilt - he would have spoilt you you - you see, if - if it was necessary, you know, if - if he could have done, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he ever do things like betting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes he did. But h
e did it with his own money, as - as mother said, oh well, you know, and - so mum said, oh well don't come to me when they lose, you see, which of course he didn't. But you see, that - that's where I mean where he was very good, if he - if he got any, you
 
know, did get a winner and that sort of thing, you know, I mean, instead of - he'd give mum a certain amount straight away, I mean he was good like that. But he'd keep a certain amount you see, and then he'd say, oh, I'm going to take the children so and 
s
o, or, I'm going to - or he'd come in with - with - so mum said, now - you shouldn't have - have bought all that, now - now Freda could have gone out and she would have got it much cheaper, you know. But dad wanted to do it, you see, he was like that. I t
h
ink in - you see, I'm like - it's rather funny, I'm like both my parents. In - in ways, in different ways. Of course my father always said I took after him, you know 'cos he thought - everything I did was right you know, but - in - in lots of ways I'm lik
e
 my mother you see, I mean I'm - I'm very impulsive in lots of things, I mean, I - I hope, at least I'm sure I'm not mean, I'm - I know I'm not really - but - I - I - I've got a little bit about me - that would - would say, ah, well don't - you know, don'
t
 spend the lot you know, do so and so, whereas if I was all my father I would say, oh blow the lot, you know, and then - you know, we - we'll wait for another time you see, but - I - I've got - I've got bits of each of them in me, which - which I think is
 probably quite a good thing you know, I mean -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Do you think they expected you to behave towards your brothers in any particular way, you did everything for your brothers and looked after them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - no, I think it used to - used to annoy my fa
ther, you see, because he said - he said, it's not fair that - that - that she should - you know - she shouldn't - she should have to do, you know, all this, that and the other. So mum said, oh, well, she's the eldest, you see, and - and of course a lot o
f
 people you know like when women are talking about children and that sort of thing you know, and they said, aren't you lucky, you know, you had - most boys you see. So - mum used to rather - sort of - shake them really 'cos she used to say, well I'd rathe
r
 have had - had some more girls. And nobody apparently in those days seemed to want girls very much you see, but - of course I suppose my mother was - well I suppose, if - if - if my brother had - we'd reversed places and he'd been older, I don't know how
 we'd have got on. 'Cos - I don't think - well, in those days, yes, you see, as I say - you see - a - a girl - child, you see, wasn't expected - I mean, it wasn't - deemed necessary for them to be very }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 knowledgeable}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  about anything, only about - you know, th
ings in the home and that sort of thing, whereas with the boys I mean if - if they were going to get anywhere in life I mean, well they - they just had to have the - thing, and then you see there were so many of boys things that one can't - sort of - you 
k
now - can't have a sort of a too much of a home made look I mean, you can make when they're tiny little boys, you can make little velvet trousers and - little things in that kind but of course when they get on to what they call long'uns as my brothers use
d
 to call them, you see, you can't really - very successfully, unless you're - you know, very clever, you can't tailor - a boy's suit like - like you could make - like girls things you see, so that - that quite often the boys just had to have things bought
,
 you know what I mean, that - that I just had to - you know, more or less put up with - but of course - it wasn't any hardship to me because my mother was - was quite clever and - and I mean although very often they were made out of - things of her own, I
 
mean, I don't suppose anybody would have - would have known you see because - she could - being lady - lady's maid she knew a lot about dressmaking and - and - and she could do that sort of thing, and when the boys were little it was - it was quite all ri
ght 'cos they used to wear these little - sort of - silk sort of blouses, little - little velvet knickers, and - or - or little kilts or something you know and - and - and of course they used to - always look very nice.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who put you to bed in those days, did your mother or father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh well I - well, I mean - until I was about - four I suppose I mean - I suppose my mother used to put me to bed, or dad if he was there, oh yes, he'd do it quite as well. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father help to bath you and things like that do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
He would have done if he was there but he was very seldom there at that time and of course - latterly as I say - I mostly took it on, I - I - I think I did it much more than mother ever did you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What would be their attitude if they were talking with grown ups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh - oh we weren't - we weren't allowed to - we weren't allowed to - to - chip in or - well we weren't very often there. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No, very rarely. I remember 
once - my father - trying his hands at mending some boots you know - and of course - hit himself you know, and he - yelled out, and my mother come out and she - gracious, she said, the children'll hear you, you the children'll hear you, but - no, I think 
-
 there may have been an occasional damn but I think it was - it was quite a long time before I - I knew swear words as such, and I think I mostly picked those up from other children, if you know what I mean. And - and I really - and - and of course it - i
t
 - it appals me nowadays because - it seems to come - it seems to come out into the ordinary conversation. With - with quite a lot of people. I - I don't think they realize what it is but - I think it's terrible. I think it's terrible. I think it's terrib
le. Oh no, no, my mother was very - very particular you know as children you know you say, oh ain't it, or something like that, or you go to say it you know, so mother used to say, isn't it. And - you know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were teachers hot on that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes
. Yes. Oh yes, yes, we were very - the - the - as I say, it was - it was a very little school, it was a very ordinary little school but - I think basically we had very very good training, very good training indeed. I think so. I've never - I've never forg
o
tten the things that I learnt there anyway. And - I'm sure I - I - I was no - no worse for it, I mean I - I probably as I say if I'd have won this scholarship I'd probably have gone on and - I'd have probably - of course - you know, been able to - to lear
n
 - quite a lot more and - and - you know - probably got on very much better but - I think there's a certain amount of practical things that - that even schooling can't teach you you know, I mean - there's a lot of things one has to learn you know from - w
ell, you know, it's just everyday life isn't it, I mean, it's - just teaches you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Often schooling stops you having them as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, yes, yes, there's that about it you know. There's that about it. I wouldn't say I was un}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 ambitious but you kno
w I never - you know, I - I - I didn't sort of make a scene and - and that sort of thing because I couldn't go, I mean, I sort of realized that I was the eldest and - I had to, you know, sort of - get a job of some sort and - and my mother - my people cou
l
dn't keep me at school 'til I was eighteen and - and more, you know. 'Cos eighteen, you know, when - when you're - when you're thirteen or fourteen you think eighteen is - being the absolute end you know I mean - I know once upon a time I used to think th
i
rty, you know, you'd nearly - finished with life sort of thing. I mean - it's very strange you know, how - as you're a child you know, how you - how you think you know. And now I think, well I - I'm just beginning to think now I'm the age I am that life b
e
gins about seventy. Because honestly, since I have - since I have retired, you know, really retired, you know - you know, I - I think I've done more things and I - I'm quite willing to have a go, you know at things and of course as I say when they said to
 
me about this - art business I said, oh I can't, you know, haven't done since our essay, well try and then when - when he paused behind me and he said - he said - you - have you been having lessons? I says, oh no. Not for about fifty-six years I haven't. 
W
ell, I said, didn't have very many lessons then, I mean they simply put a thing up and they said, well, you know, so many children copy this, well - some of them did a few strokes and - and left it, I mean it was just whatever your - you know, your idea o
f
 it. But I think one year I got very ambitious when I was quite young, and I decided I was going to paint me own Christmas cards. As - was a sort of - you know, a pair of shoes or - you know, something in that nature, which of course to a - a small child 
is not really a birthday present, you see. You see, yes, there wasn't - there wasn't the - the means to get these other things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you ever remember whether your mother made things like jam or bottled fruit or things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, occasion - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
yes, occasionally, yes, we - we used to have - we used to have - she had a sister in the country and sometimes used to send us up, you know, fruit and stuff and of course - you know, directly she did that of course we - I was - sent out for sugar
 and of course we made - oh yes. Dad didn't do much of that sort of thing, that wasn't his line at all, but -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you make pickles and medicines or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - I think she must have done on - on odd occasions you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever brew any beer in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No. No, we never had beer you see. Well my uncles - you know, all her people all drank you know, musicians particularly, but of course as I say, we - we used to get - uncle's beer and that sort of thing, and I thin
k my - my father was - was very good about things. The only thing my father would never do, if my uncle had had a friend in, one of his pals in which of course - called for beer - and - and the - you know, they'd gone off and the washing up was left, my f
a
ther would never wash up a beer glass. He would never wash up anything that had - had contained beer. He used to put them on one side. Wash everything else up, he - he couldn't - he couldn't bear it, but he never - he never ever said a word - to my uncle 
about - drinking or anything you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was there ever a temperance club or temperance league in your area?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Yes, used to be the Temperance Hall, yes. I don't think my father went there because - you see - any clubs he went to were - were c
ycling clubs you see. But - which I think a number of those - more temperate, I - I don't think - I don't think a really boozy cyclist could go very far you know. He was - he was very fond of drink, but it was - you know - lemonade - you know, the soft dr
inks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of drinks would you have with meals during the day, did you have tea or coffee or what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh, tea, tea chiefly, tea - oh wonderful tea drinkers, all - you know, all - all the family. Coffee wasn't - there - there wasn't such a - you
 see, coffee is a thing that's come on this last twenty - odd years, you know, for English people really. My mother - my mother loved coffee, because - you see, she'd lived so long abroad you see and - various times that she was so used to it you see. I -
 the only time I got used to coffee was - of course when I was in France because you see - they - they hardly ever had tea, it was - it was far too expensive.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When did you first go to France?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I was sixteen I think when I first went to France.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So that would be 1913?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you working then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How often did your mother go abroad during the years you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh - oh - oh, near - nearly every year. Nearly every year part of the time she was abroad. I 
can remember the as a child 'cos I - I used to think how wonderful, I can remember about - you see, there was one lady that she knew that was very very wealthy, and - she would never winter in England, you see, and of course she had the means to do it, an
d
 she tried out several - you know, various maids, you know, younger French maids and what have you, and she couldn't get on with them at all, see she was an old lady and - and she didn't want to adapt herself to getting used to things you see so she used 
t
o write to my mother and she used to say, do you think that - you - you - you know your little girl can cope and - with your husband to help and if you come with me on the Riviera and - she used to go for about three months, you see, she used to go around
 
about - end of November, you know, sometime, and she'd be away 'til about - February or March sometimes you see and of course - I used to - mother - mother used to send me - I used to get these lovely - 'course we get them from everywhere now but in those
 
days you only got these really glossy postcards and coloured ones from various places abroad, and then occasionally she used to send a big box, and when I opened it it would be mimosa and lilac, and you imagine, perhaps it'd be snowing, like anything here
 
you know, be a very dull day, and I'd open this lovely - box of mimosa, you know, and it used to sort of - oh it used to be wonderful you know. And then of course you see - she was - you know, she used to - pay mother quite well you see, and - and of cour
s
e mother was able to put that to one side so that when she came back from being away, and of course they used to stop - they used to sometimes hire - have a chalet - not a chalet - what do you call it - chateau you see, and then of course mother used to h
a
ve go through all the performance of hiring - maids to run it you see because she had to be exclusively with the old lady you know, well then all of a sudden she'd - had a sudden fit - that - you see, she wanted to do everything before she died, and then 
s
he'd say, oh now my dear, well we'll - I - I've got a felling I'd like to go to Egypt. You find out about the flight and we'll fly. Well my mother was getting on a bit you know, and - she'd never - hadn't flown you see 'cos all her previous things in when
 
she was a lady's maid earlier of course was all - by sea. Anyway, mum used to fly you see of course and go with her, you see, and I'd get a card perhaps one week that she'd be perhaps in the South of France or Italy or somewhere like that, the next one I'
d get through she'd be - she'd be in - in Egypt, you see, and you get - you get - thing of the Phara}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
hs or something like that you see and - then all of a sudden you get, you know, something else. Well then of course not only - not only did mother have go -
 have to sort of look after her in every way, and - and that sort of thing, although they went to very good hotels where they could probably speak quite a bit of English, but at the same time - mother used to have to - have to cope with all the currency. 
Well I mean it's - it's very very difficult - different to - about the eighteen - nineties to, you know, 1930 or '40 or - something like that you see, going on, and - any rate, she - she used to cope with it and get on with it you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So for long stretches at a time your mother wouldn't be there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No, that's why - that's why I got so used - you know, to sort of doing things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So you were sort of the regular routine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did this woman who came in to help with the washing come in at all to help during the times your mother was away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh I don't think so, I don't remember, I think we could always manage. I think we could always manage and - dad was always there - some part of the time you see, and - and then
 - then he used to say to me, you know, if - if there was a - you see, he; was in this club you see and if there was a - a bit round up on the Sunday he used to say to me, well look, shall I go? - You see. I said, oh yes, you'd better go dad, you know, of
 
course you know they - they - they'll be expecting you. So, he - he used to sort of prepare all what he could you see and - and leave to me you see and of course he used to go off and - I know lots of people used to think, how terrible, you know, the moth
e
r's away and there's that father off on his bike - you know, but - but - but the children - the children didn't worry, I mean, they got looked after, they weren't - they weren't hard done by. You know, it didn't - it didn't make much difference to them re
ally and truly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So the lady came in on washing day then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
YES? OH yes, she always come to do the wash - oh I think she would have come in if - if - if it was necessary you know but - I think - I think we found it wasn't really necessary and we could sort of cope you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What did you call this woman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh Tilly. I never knew what her really name was. Tilly something I suppose you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How did you get on with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh all right, well I just - I just used to - didn't used to both
er - I - I just used to do the same thing, I used to - give her a cup of tea when she come in which was the usual thing and I used to go - round to the pub or - if it - you know - if - if - if it had stopped in that time I used to go to the off license wh
i
ch was next to the pub and get a bottle of beer, I used to get a quart bottle you see, and put the - put it down beside her and I used to make her - fairly hefty sandwiches of bread and cheese you see, and then I used to leave her to do - you know, she us
ed to do all the whites and then all the coloureds and what have you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many hours did she come in for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh she'd come in for the day. Oh used to work for the day in that - well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What did she call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh she called me by my name. Y
ou see. And - oh she got used to me you know, and then I used to say to her - when we were having our dinner, well dinner's ready you see, and then I used to - you know, get up this dinner and she often used to say, oh this is jolly nice, you know. And - 
I
 used to say, well, yes, dad started it and I finished it off, you know. So she said, well it's very nice you know and - she used to have a - you know, a good - good meal you know. And then - I used to say to her, well - you - you needn't go back yet, 'co
s
 I'd heard my mother say this, you can have a rest if you like, you know. But I don't think she could read or write see so - I used to get the - she used to like titbits out the local paper, so I used to pick up the local paper and read her out all the go
s
sip, you know, in the local paper you know, she said, oh fancy, you know, 'cos generally there was somebody in there that - that she knew about, you know, she knew about them, and she used to say, oh I do enjoy coming here. She used to to go to lots of pe
o
ples, you know, various days you know. But - she said, I do enjoy coming here. And then she used to say sometimes, used to say - she said, it's a good job - good - good job - good job your mother didn't have boys first of all isn't it, see, so I said, oh 
I don't know. So I said, I suppose they'd have done the same. So she said, no fear. I - I never ever knew whether she was ever a Miss anybody or a Mrs or what she was, she was a - it was a sort of a non-descript type of person.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did she come from around where you lived?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, she lived - around about, but nobody seemed to know very much about her but - if anybody wanted anything I think she acted as sort of midwife and - done all sorts of jobs you know, well old I'm calling her, I suppose she was
 about sixty which of course was - you know, terribly old to me you know, but I mean she was older than - my mother was at the time you know. And - I suppose I thought she was old you know. And she seemed to be old lady, but she had plenty of go in her an
d
 I mean she - you know, she was able to do all this and then she'd - oh - oh I think she used to sometimes come back - at the end of the week sometimes to do a bit of ironing. You see, 'cos I - I - I - I - I think she used to, especially if there were she
ets and things like that because - I think she used to come back - but I don't think she did a whole day then, I think she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you say you had your uncle living there as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. Yes. Yes. My mother's youngest brother, yes. He died when he was forty-two.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How many years would he live with you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh several years. Several years, right - and - during - that's what I say, I - I was very lucky really because - as I say, as far as - you know, anything to do with music you see used to say, 
oh look uncle, I've got - I've got to learn this song for school. And he used to say, oh all right, well come up in the parlour. And I used to go up and of course he used to - he wasn't a pianist, but he - he could play of course and he used to play throu
g
h the notes you see and so then I used to sort of - like follow him you know, then he used to say, no, that's not right, that's not a G that's so and so you know, then he used to make me - like go over it to do it properly you see, so that of course at th
e - you know - after two or three days I mean I - I mean, I - I I really knew the - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would he eat with you as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, when he was in. But of course you see, it all depended how he worked you see, if he had matinees, of cour
se he'd - he'd get up - 'cos he mostly got up late because, you see, if it was evening jobs he - he wasn't home 'til about nearly midnight But it always used to be so - so strange to me, because he always used to eat quite a big supper - at night you see,
 
and - we didn't have - well we didn't have suppers us children, we had just a glass of milk and - you know, cake, but - I don't think mum and dad had - I don't think they had their meal late at night like that you see, but you see, it's what they're - wha
t
 - what he was used to you see, and then in the morning, first thing he'd have a cup of tea which dad would - probably take him in and then, about eleven o'clock, he'd have his breakfast you see. Which of course was - you know, you see - unless of course 
h
e was going to a matinee or anything like that you see. If he - if he'd got a matinee - which he'd got to get to whatever theatre it was you see, he'd - he'd have to have - he - he'd - he'd get up a bit earlier, have a breakfast, and then he'd have a sort
 of a - what you call a snack you see, buthe'd still have his meal at - proper meal at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 But the rest of the family, when they were all there, had regular eating times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh regular times, yes. Well that had to be because of school for us children you know and that sort of thing you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you remember whether you were ever allowed to talk during meals in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, not too much, no, no, no. But we - we - we were told not to stretch and grab for things you know, we 
had to - ask for things to be passed you see, and I think that's where my mother started - started on us, trying to din a little bit of French into us you see. You had - have to say, voulez vous passez, you know - so on, you see, that's how we knew all th
e
 - all the sort of eatables and - and things like that and - tasse de tea, you know, you knew - you knew a cup and - things of that kind you know, little things like that, but I mean - as regards, I mean, I never - I never learnt French as to know - you k
now - how to speak properly like verbs and what have you you know. But I think I could - I could - get on - all right if somebody was - you know, was - you know, I mean I could make myself understood quite well you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So you had a smattering of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, a little bit - a little bit of it you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When your mother was there }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 can you remember her having les}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 s food so the rest of you could have more, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - I think that would be the case when we were very hard up. Yes
, very hard up, and - I - I can remember - myself - you know, when I could see the little ones looking, you know, that often I wouldn't have a - another piece of another - one, even if I could have eaten it, if I thought there wasn't, you know, that - I -
 I've done that, but I've never - I've never really - I mean I - I - I've never starved. I've never starved. I - I've gone - gone - well - sometimes I - I could have fe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 t I could have had a little bit more you know but I knew it wasn't there and I couldn't have it you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 If there was enough were you allowed to have second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, if there was enough, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about their attitude towards things that were left uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well that was considered ver
y bad, unless for some reason it was something that you really - from a digestive point of view, you couldn't tackle you know. And - and then - then of course it was - but otherwise I mean it was that or you had no - whatever followed, pudding or what hav
e you, you see. You finished it up. Oh yes, you weren't -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father have more than anyone else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No. No. Oh no, no. No. And 'course he was - he was marvellous for - for carving when he had a - 'cos I - I don't know if you know but - he was h
ead carver before he - he took on the - chef's work, and of course they have to get so many slices out of a - out of the joint you see, and - and of course he - I mean, he could do it to perfection, you know, I mean - and I mean, when you - the - there's 
-
 there's a certain art in - in having a - whatever joint it is you see, it's a certain way that you can carve and of course if - if you're in the hotel or catering business I mean you - you've got to get - you know, to the best advantage, and then you've 
g
ot to see that, if it's pork or a fat joint or anything of that, I mean you've got to see that a - a fair proportion of the fat is delivered with the - with the other, but you've got to do it in such a way that - you know, somebody doesn't immediately loo
k
 and say, oh I've got all the so and so fat, you see. You see, there's - there's a way, there's an art of doing it, I used to love to watch my father - used to interest me, you know, this - this knife he kept you know, with the long blade you know and I u
sed to see it sizzling through you know, oh I'd love to be able to do that you know. No, my mother never ever - never ever carved the joint you see, but - not when dad was home anyway you know because - that was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who would serve the meal up, would it be your father again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, mum would do every - he - he would - he would do the meat, you know, I mean if we were all there together he would - he - that - that was his part, then he'd - had - you know, he'd - he'd put - he'd put it all out on the pl
ates, and of course he knew exactly what we - what we children would have, you see. But now and again mum would say to him, oh no, he - he can eat a bit of fat. Put a bit of fat there or - you know, put a bit - you know, 'cos - he'd say, oh well I don't t
h
ink he - he likes that, so mum said, oh well - a little bit won't hurt, you know, he'd have - dad would have been more lenient with us I think you know. But - then see dad didn't have to do with us all the time did he, you see. But of course mum was proba
b
ly right because I mean - she wouldn't have - made us eat a heap of fat or anything like that you know but - you know, my - dad would - you know, if you sort of looked and went; you know - sort of looked at him you know he'd sort of - he'd sort of - 'cour
se -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Where would the little ones sit when they were too young to sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, we always had a high chair, somebody was always in the high chair you see and always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who would feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well I would. Usually. Very quickly
 how they - how they got on to ordinary food too I tell you but of course I used to have to do a lot of cutting up in the - well of course mum used to mostly do that, you know, she used to - dad used to give her the plate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have a set order of being served in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, not that I remember, no, I don't think so. Dad used to probably sit down when he'd done the carving and - you know, then either mum would put the vegetables on or more likely he'd do it himself and - he'd start away, you know, bu
t - us children used to - used to wait 'til - you know, mum or dad had started before we, you know, used to start. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you taught to use your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes? Yes, we were taught you know as soon as we wer
e - able to do it, of course the - tiny ones used to have a - spoon I think when they were very very young they had a sort of pusher thing you know which - you know I used to sort of - try - try them with first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Could you bring toys to the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, I don't think that was - only in - must have been very early stages, no, I think that was rather frowned on, although we had quite a big table you know, but - I don't think that was - no, because I mean - the - the business of having your food was -
 you know, was a business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did anyone say grace at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
At one time I think we used to say grace, yes. Now how did that come about? I think we used to - we used to sort of say a bit of - you know - say a few words, for what we are about to receive, or something you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you ever taught to pray?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh used to always say our prayers, I used to listen to the prayers, oh yes. 'Cos they used to get very funny at times you know, children used to - of course naturally - put in for al
l what they wanted you know and of course it always used to - God bless mummy, God bless daddy, and then - all of a sudden they used to look at me and then they used to put me in, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were there any family prayers or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say that the only musical instrument was a piano?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes. More or less always had a piano.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your parents play many games with you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - don't know that they played very - I mean, dad would - would - would play when 
he was in, he would - he would play with 'em, I mean - mostly dad's - dad's thing was, you know, when toys got broken you know, mend this dad, mend this, and then of course he'd mend it. And then he'd - he'd probably, if it was a - truck thing or somethin
g
 on wheels you know, and then he'd say, now let's see how this goes, well then in the end you'd probably find dad on the floor with the - whichever child it was you know, and then mum'd come in, she said, oh, you know, can't have all this bunkum you know,
 and then of course they'd go - probably go out in the - in the garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would you play in the parlour?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh no. Oh no, certainly not, no, in the - in the kitchen, the kitchen was our room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When you had your meals could you just get down when you felt like it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh no, no, you waited, you waited, then you were told, you know, when you could get down, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What did your parents do to amuse themselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh I don't know, I think they used to do - well they - they - they both lik
ed reading and of course mum used - was generally busy doing some sort of mending or - or needlework of some sort, you know. And - well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did they have many friends round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not a great deal. No, not a great deal. Not that they weren't - friendly 
people, but you know I suppose the circumstances didn't - didn't warrant it, either they were people with - you know, several children or - or what have you and - you know, didn't come out, and of course I think not - not being drinkers you know is - is o
n
e of the things, but - I do remember round about Christmastime and - you know, Boxing Day and various times like that - there - there used to be quite a few people in playing cards and that sort of thing and, you know, mum an I used to make the sandwiches
 and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What would they think about playing cards or something like that on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh they wouldn't do it. It wouldn't be necessary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did they ever have neighbours round?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not very much, no, my mother wasn't - wasn't a - I mean she was
 a friendly enough person and I mean, you know, in the street and that sort of thing, but - she didn't like the idea of neighbours coming round, you know, she always thought, well - it generally ends up in a row of some sort you know. No, she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who would be the people who came round, would they be relatives or what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, relatives and odd friends probably that mum - know mum in the - in the past and - and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your mother and father have the same friends or did your father have his friends and your mother have her friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well, they - they mostly - mostly both knew, you know, whatever friends came round, you know. No, they weren't - they weren't people for - for going out and - they - they very seldom went out toget
her because as I say their pursuits were - were so different, wasn't because they - they were quarrelling or anything, it's just that - you see, mum and I weren't - very interested in - and, you know, when we got older I know once - on one occasion dad sa
id, oh, he said, you know, they keep on at the club asking me about you - I suppose dead talked about us you see, well this was in latter years you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So really they'd have their own different interests?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Had their own pursuits you see, yes, and - and it worked very well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you tell me your mother was making records before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes, long before. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So she'd be going out when she was free?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, yes, she used to - but - but she did have a re
cording trumpet in - in one house where we were, you know, that - she used to be able to record on you know, on the old wax - cylinder things you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 She actually could record in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes. Well I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not just a record player playing it back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. Oh no, no, no, weren't - weren't record players in those days, I mean - yes, it was a - a phonograph that they had, yes. But she -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You could actually make your own records?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes you could, yes, you could make them. We
ll then I think you had to take them, these wax things to the company, I don't know what they did to them, I don't know - no, it was His Master's Voice mostly. She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did she ever have anybody round for singing evenings or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 She'd always go out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, well of course we - we - you know, she was in - very big choirs and things like that you know where she did oratorio and that sort of thing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would she ever go on tours with these choirs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Y
es? She went with the Fleet Street choir, she went to - she went what they call the Scandinavian tours, she went for six weeks, she went to - Norway, Holland and Sweden. Yes. I wasn't able to go, I was - I was very upset, I would love to have gone, but I 
c
ouldn't - I couldn't spare six weeks of - you see, and - and firms and anybody weren't - weren't even lenient in those days to ever let you have it if you paid your own - time off, they wouldn't let you have that amount of timeoff in those days you know, 
I mean, it's different now if you go through for anything, they - they let you do it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say your father was interested in cycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, it was a way life nearly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you ever interested in sports at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, not really. No, not re
ally - 'cos I - I wasn't very strong as a child, I used to have terrible fainting fits you see and I wasn't - and I - I was never allowed to do what they call physical exercise, I wasn't allowed to do it, because I used to faint you see, I - I'm very very
 sorry about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you have many hobbies when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Don't know that I had really very many hobbies, I think, you know - the children and - and various things, shopping and - and looking after - you know, I - I - I don't think I had much time for hobbies really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you do anything like fishing or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No, I didn't, my brothers used to like fishing and - 'course they liked cricket and football.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, we normally had a cat - always
, and - at various stages we had a dog. You know, that - we had, and I think my brothers tried at various times to bring - you know, other things into the - into the place, I - I know - one of them, when he used to - want a fight and he had a pet mouse an
d he used to try and put this down my - back and - you know, frighten the life out of me and - that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever play with other girls or neighbours children or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did I? Oh I used to have girl friends, yes. But - I mean - I
 didn't - I didn't see a lot of them, you see, they were - they were more fortunate than I was, you see, because - they - they mostly had either older sisters or older brothers or - they were in the middle of the family and - when they'd finished school a
n
d had their tea and what have you and probably do an errand or so for their mother - I mean, they - they could go off somewhere, well, it was very seldom I could go off, the only times I could go off was when I went to - Girls Friendly Society you know - 
and that sort of thing and saw them there. Then come back you see. But I never sort of went off very much on my own you know with - with other girls, not until I was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever play in neighbours houses or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not very much, 
no. No. No, well you see most of the neighbours were like ourselves only most of them had more children than us, most had seven or eight children you see, and - I suppose - they - you know there were plenty to - in themselves you see and if - if each of t
hat child - each - each of - if you had a family of eight and each of the children had - friends, well you - you - you soon got a - a family up didn't you, you soon got a - crowd.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was there any one particular brother that you felt closer to than the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - the one that's alive now, he was terribly delicate. Terrible delicate, we had a lot of trouble with him, he - he'd had - by the time he was twelve he'd had fourteen operations, he had - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 abscess}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  on the brain, neu}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
itis media, it - it's - i
t's - it's a wonder really he's turned out very clever actually. But it's a wonder because - it's - it's a very terrifying thing you know and it's so near the brain that it - it could - you know, it could cause madness you see. It's a very - but I think i
t was a result of a fall, actually you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So he was in hospital quite a bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, he was in hospital for - oh - I - I think he only had about three years of schooling, but - he ended up on the - top class. No, he'd - we - he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How did you cope for paying for hospitals in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes didn't pay. You didn't pay. But - you had a - you know, you had a lot of - toing and froing, there wasn't the - as I remember there wasn't the ambulance system - very prevalent in those days, I 
mean, if you went on an ambulance you know, you - you - you'd gone, you know, it was the last straw sort of thing. Oh and there - there wasn't so many facilities and of course - I'm talking of the - where he mostly went, where I remember going with mother
 with him, was - to the Tap Street, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857  children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
s hospital which is now - only just now, I only saw it - about a fortnight ago, it's - it's made into a - a sort of a convent place, the old Tap Street hospital. But then you see, as he got older - as he pa
ssed fourteen, they wouldn't attend him any longer as a child you see, and he had to go to Charing Cross after that. You know, and have - and you see, I always used to have to go with mother because you see there was always one or two children to take you
 see and of course - with him, you know, he - he - obviously had to have various things done - you know, and - and of course mother could only cope with him so I had to go to mind the other babies you see, when they go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you remember a funeral in the family in these years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Only my grandma's, my mother's mother. But - we children didn't go. And of course I remember my little brother, the one little brother, I don't remember the other - one that died, but I remember the one - one, you know, the o
ne that had the accident and I did go of course to his funeral because - you know, for a long time I - I - I couldn't realize that he was - he was dead at all you know, it was - it was a great blow. They thought they were going to have a lot of trouble wi
t
h me actually because - I think I was so near him, you know, that - you know, it was just one of the things that I couldn't - couldn't imagine you see. You see, he - he had an accident you see and he lived for about six months on his - 'cos he had a wonde
r
ful constitution, but - he died from meningitis. Meningitis of the spine you see, and it didn't really come out - until after death, the actual, you know, markings you see. But it was a - it was a great - it was a great shock to me, I was a long long time
 before I could - sort of get over it you know. Oh -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did people draw the curtains and things like that in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. And of course another thing I can remember which a lot of people don't remember, when people were very ill in those day
s - they always put straw down outside - in the road you know because - well, there were mostly - a lot of horse traffic of course in those days too, but - they put the straw down, that was when people were very ill, I mean, better off people than us of c
o
urse that could afford it, I don't know - I suppose they - did it to the council or something you know, and they used to put the - these bales of straw down so that - and of course us kids thought it was great, you know, we used to shuffle through it you 
know, but - it was done, you know, to - to keep the noise down as much as possible, but that was mostly for people that - that were nursed at home. Probably had - heart trouble or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you ever taken out shopping with your mother or father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes. Yes, quite often. We used to go down to Berwick market sometimes for - for a change of sc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 nery you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was this in Pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 cadilly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Off - off there, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever go out with just your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No, I don't thin
k very often, I - I don't think there was many occasions when we could have done really you see, it was - it was rather - rather difficult, well when we did as I say we mostly went for the day, and then - like we'd all go, you know, as - as - he'd go firs
t of all with the - on the bike you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say you never actually went away for a holiday, it used to be more day trips?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not very often. Once or twice I did because we had - my mother had a sister who in the Isle of Wight, and we used to go th
ere sometimes, you know, for a holiday. And then in turn we'd have her children would come up - to us in London you see. I went about far more with - with my cousins and people like that, showing them round London than - ever I did on my own you know beca
use - when they come up from various - parts of the country they wanted to see all around you see, so of course I used to be - have to be the one to take them you know. Go to Madame Taussaud}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 s you know and what have you. Like when this - one that was here a
 little while ago, when they came from India you see, there were four - four of the - my uncle's - children, and - this Spanish mother of theirs, and - we more or less - sort of took them in 'til they could get somewhere - to live you see, but of course t
h
ey were a very different cup of tea from - from us children you see, they - they - they'd lived in India for so long, they'd had native servants, they'd - they'd more or less run wild you see, and - they - they - they weren't used to discipline at all, an
d
 - oh they - you know, I think - I think it - went down very badly first of all with them but of course - mother wouldn't - wouldn't let them - you know, wouldn't - let them sort of get her down, I mean she said, oh well, you're here and I'm looking after
 
you, you know, well, their mother was in hospital here, and - you - you'll have to - do what we do, you know. I think they used to feel sorry for us actually. But - afterwards since he's grown up I mean he's realized you know, you know, how - how good - y
o
u know - it was really for them really but of course - - it was really a bit unfair I suppose coming - coming - all the way from India you see and then - this Spanish mother of theirs you see, she wasn't - wasn't - probably hadn't got the same ideas as us
 
- about how children should be you see and of course as - as you say in - in those days I mean servants were - you know, very very cheap - out there. And you see, and - and they weren't used - and then uncle you see was away a lot - you know, and - very o
f
ten they used to have to go - whatever part of India they were if it got too hot they used to go up in the hills and that sort of thing, the wives and children you know. So that - you know, they - they never really had much discipline you see and she wasn
'
t - she - she - she was a - she was a very sweet woman as a person in herself but she - she was no - there was no question of - discipline at all, I mean that didn't come into it, I mean the children cried for what they wanted and they got it and I mean t
hat was it you see, but of course that didn't go down with my mother, I}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15597842\charrsid1069857  mean - you know, that was no g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
o, you - you - you didn't cry unless you were hurt or something was wrong, you didn't cry for - just that you - you wanted something and - you know, and - 
and of course, food everything was different to them you see, but of course they had to get used to what - you know, what - what we had and - and that's and that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How often would they come up to stay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh they - we - we - we had th
em with us for about two months. I think it's the only - only time, you know, my mother - my mother ever really got cross and of course she couldn't get cross with them so she used to get cross with you know. It was - yes, it was - well it was - it was to
o much, you see they - you see, when - you - when you try with children that have never been disciplined it's very hard, you see, when they're somebody else's children it's very difficult you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you remember whether your father ever had any political interest at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well - of course he was a - he was a Lloyd George man. Yes, he was a Liberal. My mother was always - always Conservative. I don't think they argued about that really, but I mean - you see, they just stuck to what they thought y
ou see, I mean, dad didn't say - you know, oh I think you ought to be a Liberal, you see, in - in those days - which was rather wonderful I think because in those days really, I mean, the - average working woman, I mean, she was whatever her husband was, 
I
 mean, she probably didn't know a thing about you know politics which - you know, perhaps is all to the good, but - you know, you - if your husband was a - a Labour man say, or what have you, well you were automatically one. But you see, my mother - my mo
t
her didn't you see when dad used to pass out about Lloyd George and that, the Liberal - party and all this, that and the other, she used to say, oh well, you - you - you think what you - think and I think what I think, you know, and I'm going to be - so a
n
d so. Well of course when it got time, you know - when I got older you know to be - have a vote and that sort of thing you see, dad used to very craftily say to me, well I think the Liberal people you know have got the best chance, you know, I used to wai
v
er between the two, which I still do. But I'm - I'm really rather sorry, although I'm at heart a Conservative if I'm anything, and - and - but I'm very sorry for the Liberal people because - I fell that if only they could get up in enough strength, I thin
k that they've got the best of both - parties, myself. You know, as much as I know about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you ever interested in politics yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Not really. No, not really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I don't suppose your mother could vote in elections before 1918 but did your father actually go along and vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, they used to vote. Oh yes, he'd vote. As I say, they'd - they'd both go up to the - you know - polling booth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Could women vote in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - a bit later on probably I'm talking of now, yes. Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he take part in any political activities like canvassing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No. No. No, I don't think he - I don't think he was committed as much as all that, but - you know, I mean if anybody was talking, you know, say, don't say to me, he's 
only a so and so Communist or something like that you know. He - he had - he had views about that, you know, he didn't - he didn't quite care about that sort of thing but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Why do you think he was a Liberal?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I don't know, I suppose - well I sup
pose he - he felt that the - at the time they'd got the best policy. Of course I mean - I mean - as far as Lloyd George is concerned I mean I suppose he - like a lot of these politicians I suppose he had a lot of good points. There's a lot of things that 
-
 that - that were right. I mean, he - he did bring out - he did bring out the - what do you call it - National Health business didn't he, he did start it. And - he started quite a lot of things and I mean he - he - you see, why - why I think my father was
 
keen on Lloyd George - he - he'd been - he'd been a miner's son, and he was a - you know, he was really basically a - a - you know a working man's - you know - I mean, he'd got on but I mean he was actually a working - man, whereas most of the - most of t
h
e - Conservatives of that period were - either out of the peerage or - what have you or - you know somebody that in my dad's capacity hadn't done that much - you know, themselves, I mean, they were born in - born whatever they were you see. Whereas my mot
h
er, you see, she dealt so much with - the so called gentry that she felt that she knew - that side of it too you see. And - as - as she always said, she said, well it's so silly of these Communist people to say about everybody being equal, because, she sa
i
d, if we were all equal today - somebody is going to have a bit more than you've got tomorrow because that's only human nature, and it is true. I had cousins that were very great on being - and - and as they got on and progressed you know - one day - when
 
she came to see us you know, they'd got this beautiful house that they'd bought and one thing and another and she was talking about an au pair girl you see. So my mother said tohher, well - what do you want a new pair girl for? She said, to look after the
 
children. So mother, said, oh, but she said, you don't believe in that surely, she said, everybody's as good - she said, why should she come and work for you? So she looked a hit abashed so she said, well - why shouldn't she if I can pay her? So mum said,
 
well - how can you pay her if we're all equal? She said, you don't practice what you preach. She said, if - if we're all equal, she said, I - I', not saying we are but you - you - you've always said it, and you've always stuck up for it, she said, we're a
ll equal like that, she said, she's just as good as you, she said, she shouldn't have to come and mind your children, you should mind your own children. She didn't like it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 In some cases if the employee voted differently to the employer ...........?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes. Yes. Oh, of course there was a lot of that in the very early days, I mean you automatically had to be whatever your boss was, I mean that was - that was the thing you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father have any pressure like that put on him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I don
't think so, I don't think so, I think he must have - but you see, he never had - he never had bosses in the same - same way as my mother did you see, because it was quite different. I mean, it was more of an impartial thing, you see, and it didn't it did
n
't last, I mean, my - my father, apart from the time when he went to Harrods, he was about twelve years at Harrods altogether, but - but apart from the time he went there I mean, he - he - he probably hadn't had a job for more than about a year or so, at 
a
 time, you see. Not because there was anything - you know - probably the man's business didn't - flourish or - something of that kind, or - or - you know - or or he wanted a Frenchman or he wanted a - an Italian or - or something of that, or he was bought
 out by somebody else or - expanded and - you know, didn't -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Your mother worked for gentry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Would she live in when she wasn't abroad?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, of course.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 When she wasn't abroad would she live in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh she wouldn't - oh - oh no, she wouldn't - oh no, she wouldn't live in. She'd be home, yes, oh yes, she'd be home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of people did she work for, what line were they in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - all - all depends what was wanted doing you know and what was necessary to be doin
g you know. They were mostly people that had known people that mother had been with, you know, for years, you know, that was the sort of thing, she used to mostly go for the day and - it was mostly to do lady's maids work you know and of course as the - a
s
 the time got on it got less - you know - well got more difficult rather - for for people to - to employ sort of servants. You see, they - nowadays there - there's very few houses where they've got the full implicate you know, they haven't got - butler an
d
 - footmen, you see, and in the days I'm talking about, like my brother I mean - when - some time after he couldn't get any work - for a little while, he went - he went as valet to the Duke of Portland. Well there were forty servants. You see, and he had 
his own rooms, I've seen them, I've been there, he had his own rooms and he had servants to wait on him. You see, that was - that was the position of - of - of things in those days you see. They had servants waiting on servants you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You said there were the professional, the business and the working class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What group do you think your family belonged to at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh I think we were working class, I think we always considered ourselves working class. And there was no stigma a
ttached to that, I mean - that wasn't anything - out of the way to be working class I mean -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you think there were different levels inside the working class?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Probably. Probably so, yes. Yes. Yes. Then of course it comes business. Business - y
ou know, the little business man you know, you know, little man with a little business you see, that was a sort of a first rung up sort of thing, you know, that's when you - first sort of got ideas. Well then of course it - then it got to owning your own 
h
ouse. Which of course was another - step up if you could manage it you see. And then of course - started coming this all hire purchase business where - nobody waited for years and years 'til they could afford something, they just simply got it and - and p
a
id for it when they could you see. But of course, that - that was always ignored as far as we were concerned, I mean, what we - what we couldn't afford we didn't have and - and - probably I mean we didn't have as - you know - what shall I say - up to date
 homes as - as a - and - and quite frankly I would never want one. That's why you see I've got quite a few antiques. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 So it was possible to move up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was it possible to move down as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - oh quite -
 quite - quite easily I should imagine, I mean - you know - it's a quite easy to - to not do something for some time and - you know - and be out on your - on your ear sort of thing you know. But I - I think it was - it's all - I mean, the - the great thin
g
 was to try and have a trade if you could, I mean if you had a trade you were - more or less never out of work for very long. But of course - there was so many unskilled people - about - through no fault of their own - and - and - and of course when their
 jobs - you know - were just - you know, non-existent well then - they - there was just nothing for them you see and there was very little relief for people like that, was very - very sad really you know. And of course you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were there people like that around Chelsea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh quite a lot, quite a lot. Quite a lot. In the old days I should say - yes. Oh I should say - fifty percent - probably. Yes, quite. Quite. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What was peoples attitude towards families like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well - you know - of c
ourse there - there was always certain people that will always - always go - you know - and ask for things, and you see and there's always - the other people - the other sort that - you know, will die first sort of thing you see, I think we belonged to th
a
t category you know. I think the idea of asking for anything you know, would - you know, as I say there was all that sort of charity element you know, that was the feeling that one got you see, and that was the feeling I'm afraid you know, although it's y
e
ars ago, that was the feeling that they gave to people, that they were - you know, they were asking and - and - and getting charity you know and - you know, were the sort of the thing, you had - you had to be very hard faced to do it you know, you had to 
have a very thick skin, it was no good being sensitive on - on - on those - terms you know. No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father go to any other clubs apart from the cycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 No. No, they were mostly cycling clubs he went to. But various ones he went to you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he ever used to go the races, you said he used to bet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, yes, yes, oh yes, he used to go there. Of course some - sometimes he used to go down - you know - with a catering firm, you know in - in that capacity you know, like - that use
d to please him very much you know. Oh yes, he's been to Ascot and - various places. Of course mother's - mother's also - been to races but - not because she was interested in the horses but because - you know, they - they probably did that sort of thing,
 
the same as - various people she was with were - went - shooting you know, had a shooting box up in Scotland and that sort of thing you know, she'd be up there. For that same reason you see. No, I think life is a great deal what you - what you make of it 
or what you can make of it, and you, can make, you know, quite a lot I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you ever know of any families that got ruined by drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, yes, unfortunately it was - it was there because you see - drink was very cheap in those days you see 
and - and of course if you're not of a very - what shall I say, you know - emotionally and otherwise not very strong, I mean - you know, it was - I suppose it was one of the ways of sort of drowning your sorrows as it were you see and it was quite a - it 
w
as quite a thing, I mean, people didn't - well, they more or less I think - it was expected, especially men that did labouring sort of work you know. And costermongers, they were expected to have a very big capacity you know for - for drink and that sort 
o
f thing and - and - oh yes, I can remember the old days in the - in the - the Wilton Street police station, it's now where the traffic wardens go, I see it's still there, but I can remember them wheeling the drunks in you know and of course all us kids, w
e
 used to run up behind, you know, we used to think it was great fun you know, we couldn't realize these poor souls you know - we - 'cos they used - they used to - used to do some funny antics you know, they used to have to more or less strap them onto thi
s
 - stretcher thing to get them along, you know, the policemen you see. And then we used to watch the old black maria, we used to always feel sorry for people going in on Saturday nights you see, because they were all there Sunday, and the black maria used
 
to come round Monday morning to take them off to the courts you see. And - we - we always used to try and get round there you know before it got - you know, on - on our way to school and that to see if we could - see the black maria going, it used to go a
b
out half past eight. And we used to get round there about half past eight to watch the black maria going off to count how many - you know, were going off, well of course by that time they - if they were drunk you see they'd more or less sobered up, they'd
 
had all - all Saturday and the rest of Saturday night in the cell and they'd had all - all day Sunday you see, and probably only had a cup of tea or something you know, don't know what the police used to give them, then of course they'd go up, you know, f
o
r the - court on Sunday. And I - I've - I - I've been going to school once and I - I - I - I told mother about it afterwards, I thought, oh isn't it a shame mum, I was going to school with one girl and of course her father was in this, she was, saying goo
d
 bye dad, as if he was going off to a picnic you know, and of course he'd - he'd got over his drunken about but he was a - he was what they called one of the regulars, he was always in this - this man you know. Goodbye dad, she was waving you know as if h
e was going off on a picnic, the poor man was going off to - you know, I - I don't - I don't think, you know, that they did anything very much you know, they probably -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were policemen very much in evidence in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes, but - of course 
round here there was one or two very rough quarters in the - in - in my younger days, and - they used to go two at a time. They daren't go around on their own, no, they were frightened - and of course - it - it's a funny thing you should say that you know
,
 nowadays, they say it's one of the signs of growing old, but nowadays policemen look so jolly young. In my day - I - the policemen, the average policeman was always about thirty, like to being with you know. And the police sergeants of course were always
 
- you know - old chaps sort of thing you know. But - I don't know, somehow, they gave you - they gave you a lot of confidence and of course there was no traffic lights and I mean and we were always - always taught always even when it was horse traffic or 
w
hat have you, we were always taught to - never to try to run across a road, always to wait for the policeman. And of course which we always did. And - and my mother always taught us, which I think was very wise, that - you know - if - if we were lost or i
f
 we were frightened or anything - anytime we were out you know - to always - go and ask a policeman, you know, never to stop and ask a passer by in case - it was somebody you know, that shouldn't be you know, and I think it's very good, I think it was ver
y
 silly because a lot of people in those days used to frighten children about policemen you know, they used to say to them you know, if you're not good I'll get the policeman round after you, you know, I - I'll get the policeman to talk to you and - he'dll
 
take you off and all that sort of thing, and it - you see, in some little one's minds you know that - that would be sort of a bogey element, which I think was wrong because I mean, the average policeman is generally a very - friendly sort of chap you know
,
 well specially our policemen I mean they are aren't they, all - all the world over. And - you know, I - I think that we had the right idea because we - we'd never be frightened if we - if - if we did get anywhere out of our depth a bit and we were a bit 
-
 or felt we were - didn't quite know where we were, I mean, we'd - make a bee line, and of course in those days you see you always saw them at the various - you know, what do you call it, stopping places you see. And of course they were always - round on 
t
he beat, I mean you hardly see a policeman on the beat these days do you, I mean they're either in Panda cars or what have you. But in those days you see, they used to do regular beats and at regular times and of course you - you know. You got to know. An
d of course we would always go up to a policeman and, you know, say -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You say there were some rough areas around here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh very rough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were some families thought of as rough and some as respectable in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes, well they - they 
- they were - there were quite - quite a few of - of the rougher elements but - you see, when I say rough I mean I don't think - I - I mean they weren't - snatch and grabbers and they wouldn't have - have beaten us up or anything like that. I don't say wh
at they might have done to anybody - you know, better off than us, but I mean they - they wouldn't have harmed us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was there any distinction between labourers and craftsmen in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh yes. Oh yes. Yes. Oh yes, if - if - if your - if your d
ad had a - had - you know, got a sort of trade and that sort of thing you know I mean - you were - you were really one up on the kids whose - whose - whose father -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did your father do an apprenticeship period for being a chef?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well I suppose he 
must have done, I don't remember when it was but I suppose he must have done. I mean, he couldn't have taught himself all he knew. I don't remember, you know, that's one of the things I - I - I don't seem to be very - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 You think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, not particularly but - but my - my mother couldn't bear what she called communists. She always said, there's no need to be common. You might be poor but you - you - you need - you needn't be c
ommon, there's no need - and there's no need to speak - that - that was another thing, she didn't like - she didn't like this - well I - I - I mean I - I shudder sometimes when I hear some of the children round here, that they - they don't speak - you see
,
 they don't teach them, they teach them phonetically or something at school now don't they? I don't know. I told - I - I - I said to my niece when she was coming, she said, oh well we don't do it like that now auntie. I said, well no, perhaps you don't, b
u
t, I said, I don't think it's right what you do do. It doesn't seem to give the children the same - and they do speak very badly. Probably because their parents - speak the same you see and of course, to a child, I mean what your parents - do is - you kno
w
, is - is the thing to do isn't it really. You see, that's why I mean a lot of these little ones round here I mean you hear them - using most terrible swear words you know, I - I stopped one little boy once, I said, you mustn't say that, that's naughty. S
o
 he said, oh can't be very naughty, my dad says it. So I said, yes, I expect your dad does say it, but still that - you see, the child - I mean - you know they - they don't realize children, say most awful things. No, I don't think it's - it's very nice, 
I don't think it's -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Can you remember in those days anybody that you thought, oh she's a real lady, or that's a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well it's something that instinctively you see - that instinctively you know. It's - it's a very strange thing, becau
se - I don't know - I don't know how to express it but - if you meet - you know, what my mother would term a lady or a gentleman, it has nothing to do with - attire, nothing to do with clothing, nothing to do with that but directly they speak to you you k
n
ow. It's something to do with manners I think. I think that's something to do with manners. And I think that's something that's been ridiculed to such an extent that - that the majority of people - you know - they think it's just funny. But I don't think 
it is. I don't think good manners is - is - is ever - is ever a waste. No, I don't think so. I don't think so. -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Were you ever told to curtsey or show respect in any way to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well only, of course we - you know, at the school we used to v
ery often have - you know - old - Princess Marie Louise and - very old Princess and - one or two of the older Princesses come and of course we always had to do our curtsey you see. And - and that sort of thing, but - no, I think that had - that had began 
to go out and you know you didn't touch your forelock and things like that kind. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What about things like calling people sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Sir. Yes, well that I think is a very good thing. I think - I still think - and - and you still, if you - if you lis
ten sometimes, you will still hear - quite grown men call their father's sir. Which I think - I think is - that is - is something rather nice really myself. I - I - I don't think you - I mean, a lot of people will say, oh sissy and all, well I don't think
 
so. I - I - I don't see that it is. I think it's - I think it's something rather nice. I think - I think a certain respect - mind you, I mean - if you're going back to Victorian times, well then I think they did carry it a little bit too far. I mean you p
robably - you know - sort of the Barrat\rquote 
s of Wimpole Street touch you know, you - you had to be, you know, the - they were far too much kept down. No, I mean you want - want a happy medium but I - I - I think - I think respect for parents is - is - is a gre
at thing. And I did respect my parents, and - you know, I - I think that - so much trouble nowadays you see - there is no respect, you see, they don't - they don't seem to - merit respect and they don't get it. You see, which - which I think is a shame. '
C
os after all, whatever they are or whatever they've been - they are your parents. And I mean whether you've made good - which lots of people have, that's why I'm a great admirer of Tommy Steele, and people of his kind, because he never forgets, or not for
 
very long, that he was once a poor boy, he never forgets the people that he - he came from, which I - I don't think you - you should do, but you see, unfortunately you do see too much of the other, and I mean, I've known - I've known people of my age that
 
have grown up and have been ashamed of their parents I'm sorry to say. And - and - and they've been parents like my parents, and brought them up and - given them as much as they could - educational wise and - and things of that kind you know, and even don
e perhaps more than my parents did, even sent them - I mean, I know of one girl, that her parents sacrificed quite a lot to send her to Pitman\rquote 
s to learn shorthand which you had to pay for yourself you know, and - and quite a lot and I mean they hadn't much
 money and - and then they'd - and she got on, certainly, but she got on. But then she got that - she found little faults in her parents and that sort of thing and it got on to such an extent that she didn't visit her parents, and - and things - well that
 
- that I - I - I don't call that getting - 'cos she did say to somebody once, oh well, now I've got up in the world I've got to forget those times. But - I don't - I don't think so, I don't think that's getting on in the world, I don't think she's got on 
i
n the world. She has in material things, she's got money, but I don't think - I don't think to know that her - her parents - you know, are sort of living on assistance and - and - and - needn't be, because - she could quite well - I don't think that's - t
hat's to the good. Not - not to my way of thinking. But still that's only me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of people would be the teachers and the clergymen and tradespeople, what kind of groups would they belong to in those days?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Oh well, the - the - well - clerg
ymen of course always come under the professional heading you see. See, a clergyman, a doctor, dentist, people of that kind - they - they - they were always - you know, sort of - on the up-grade, you know, they were coming up sort of thing you know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 How about teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well teachers - teachers had a pretty good - you know, pretty fair, we always - always - always - respected a teacher I mean you know I mean - if you knew of anybody who was marrying a teacher you know you thought they'd gone up in
 the world, but of course even in those days if you married, I mean, several of my friends did marry policemen, well I mean that wasn't a bad job considering, in those days you see. But of course a soldier, that wasn't considered quite so good you see. It
's - it's very funny the way - the way - things decree you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Who would be the most important people in the area you lived in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well, not exactly important I shouldn't think but more - like solicitors - you know, lawyers, solicitors, doctors, d
entists, you know. People -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What kind of people went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Well I think - I think they come from all - all - but I - I'll say one thing about the average working people, they probably didn't ever go to church themselves a lot of them. But t
hey nearly always sent their children, and sent their children to Sunday school. And some of them, I mean I think they did a bit too much because they sent them two and three times on a Sunday.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did you just go the ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 I usually went twice. Usually.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 In the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Do you think policemen treated the people well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh I think so. Oh yes, there was a very good relationship you know - among them. Very good. I mean, as I said they had their old regulars, and if they could -
 I mean if - if a man could - reasonably stand up and they knew where he lived you know, even if he had had a drop too much, I mean they would - they would - more or less take him home, you know, and - push him in. If - if - if he didn't start - on the ar
guments and what have you see. Oh yes, they were very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Was your home rented in these days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
Oh yes, yes, always rented, oh yes, we never - we never had a home of our own, I think it was a great disappointment to my mother but - as I say, my f
ather was - if anything he was too contented. You see, if he got a certain amount, he felt that - he - he was all right, he never thought of the times when he didn't get anything. You see. So -;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Did he belong to a sick club or a boot club or a savings club of any kind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 
No, he didn't - he - he wasn't very keen on insurances, that's why my mother always - always got us insured and that, though - yes, and I - I know - we had a laugh once, he says, well it's not right, he said, you've got me insured 
for more than - you know, you've - you're insured for, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15033865 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 What were the landlords like, were they fair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14232920 AH  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2569466\charrsid1069857 Well I think so, long as you paid your rent and of course in those days it wasn't - it wasn't terribly difficult I mean if you - if you
 didn't like - you know - anything you didn't like and they wouldn't do anything for you you know, that you felt that they ought to do with repairs and what have you, well then you - you sort of - talked it over with your wife and - you walked about and -
 I mean, probably in the next street there'd be a house up you know and - you - you - you just, you know, paid up 'til the end of the week whatever it was and - and then you cleared out, I mean there wasn't much - trouble.
\par }}