{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{
\s15\qj \li0\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid1008777\rsid1317777\rsid5252251\rsid5602767\rsid7014491\rsid7631993\rsid9327351\rsid9664657\rsid10888220\rsid12322054\rsid14104528}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Int076}{\author PRASAD3}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min7}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords19573}{\nofchars111572}{\nofcharsws130884}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}
{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot7631993 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7014491 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid7014491 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \fi-461\li461\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7014491 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid7014491    \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1008777 1895}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1008777 F}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1008777 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid1008777 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid7014491\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7014491 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What year were you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 1917. On the third of November.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What year were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 1895.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
In Paddington Green police station. And - my father he - used to have F.R. on his epaulette because he was called for special duty, you know, and he used to get thirty shillings a week for that and that's what my mo
ther had to keep us all on until we grew - grew up - yes - until we grew up. And - they used to carry truncheon, whistle, gloves and a note book. And hanging from his belt was a piece of leather which held their lamp and they used to have an oil lamp, you
 
know, they used to have a man come and fill these lamps every week, you know, or each day I believe it was now they used to have to clean them out and do - but - then they had a cape - a big cape for the wintertime - it was a huge great thing and they use
d
 to have to fold it up in such a special way and used to see them leave it in the doorways of shops and different things, you know, have it in a special place every time on their beat. And - they had a certain way of rolling it up and there was everything
 
convenience like opposite the police station we had a bakers and - then there was - you know, a laundry and all sorts - everything that you could think of. Sweet shop and - there was a coffee shop I believe what the men used to go into sometimes. And - Mr
s
 Severn, you know Mrs Severn in Paddington did you? Haven't you seen the statue of Mrs Seddon and the Seddon school - they've got a school at Paddington now called the - Sarah Seddon school - yes. Well she was buried at the back of - Paddington Green real
l
y. She was sort of - mausoleum I think or something like that. And I know we used to go to school through this - churchyard and we used to be so, you know, sedate and wonder how we're going to tread across the ground, you know, because it was consecrated.
 And - then we had Pickfords at the side of us where the horses used to go up to bed of a night, you know, they'd go }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 blop}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
, blop, blop up to bed. Up the slope, they had a slope there and of course it was all horse - horses then in those days. And the local b
read that used to be tuppence ha'penny and sugar, penny farthing. We used to get that up the Home and Colonial in Edgware Road. My mother used to go up there - once a week, you know, to get all the grocery. And - Father Christmas of course he was at Gardn
ers and we used to go and see him every Christmas, you know, used to tap on his window and he'd come with a present to give us. And - the film The Blue Lamp that was taken from Paddington Green Police station. You remember The Blue Lamp - the film.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It isn't the Paddington Green that Jack Warner ....?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes, that's Paddington Green police station. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How many years did you live in the house you were born in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well I moved when I was seven. I came to Queens Park and I've been on here ever since I was seven.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 On this estate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. I was at thirty-nine Fifth Avenue. And from there I went to Second Avenue with my mother and father. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your father left the police station when he left the police did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know why you moved houses on this estate?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Well, we lived with Council}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5602767\charrsid9327351 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 or Waycock in Fifth Avenue and he was a marble mason and traveled the world, you know, collecting marbles and he used to have the Primrose League, you know,
 meetings and my mother used to keep the two rooms that he had clean and we had the rest of the house because they were big houses down Fifth Avenue, you know, the first class houses. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
And - from there we went to Second Avenue. And - lived with my mother - my mother and father died from there and of course we all got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 and - went from home. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I had four sisters and two brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Whereabouts in the family did you come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I was the last 
but one. I was last but one. And - the buses were all open decked you know and they used to have mackintosh covers across and in the wet weather, you know, used to get - they used to cross the knees and used to run down and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But your head was still getting wet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. But we didn't - we really loved it you know to get up onto the bus. And there was horse drawn trams along Harrow Road and they used to have a horse go at the bottom of the bridge and bring the tram up, you know, into the - up the hil
l. And of course that was all done away with and then they went and extended it to Edgware Road, you know, put them right through to Edgware Road. And - the band used to play on the lawn at Paddington station every Saturday. I don't know whether it does n
o
w but it used to do that. And most of the lamps were gas, do you remember that, gas lamps - yes, they were all gas. And they used to have a man come round, you know, and poke a stick up and light the light. And even round in Queens Park, even on a foggy n
i
ght - because we had a lamp outside our house one time - it was an ordinary lamp - he used to poke the stick up through and light it and - but it wouldn't matter if it was ten or one in the morning, you know, you could hear him come up these stairs and li
ght the light. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Have you any idea how old your father was when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, now - how old was he now - no, I really can't think of that one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know where he came from?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, they both came from Norfolk both of them. Yes, 
both from Norfolk. My mother come from Snettisham and my father came from Docking - Docking - Docking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did he do when he left the police force?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well he had a - a place on the Borough Council. They gave him a job on the Borough Council. And 
- oh and when they used to tar these pavements on Queens Park they used to get down on their hands and knees to do it and they used to be the - Italian people that used to do it - and they used to do it on their hands and knees - it was marvel}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12322054\charrsid9327351 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ous the way 
they did it, you know, all so smooth and nice you know. So different - ally by hand - used to get down on their hands and knees with a - a wooden block and go all over it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The Italians used to do it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, Recu - Regushia was their name - Regushi
a. And it was very strange because the - my - old house in thirty-nine, Fifth Avenue is a - a lady down in there who my husband used to go to school with her husband and - you know, she can remember all about Droop Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Very much a village community this is isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. It - well it was in - in olden days, you know, there were more neighbourly than what they are really. Well my - my husband was the top boy at Droop Street school, yes, and he was for many years. I've given my grandson all his
 medals, he never stopped away from school one day, now that's a record isn't it? No, he's got all those medals and now - Philip's got them.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He got them for attendance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, punctuality and attendance, you know, used to be all colours, you know
, gold silver and bronze, you know, the little bar on it was bronze and all sorts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your father ever being out of work in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, never. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He always had a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Always had a job - yes. Oh he was a - real o
ne and so was my own husband, I mean he worked very hard - he was fifty-eight years on the West - Great Western and I don't think that - barring for losing his fingers and being away he was ever away from work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know if your mother ever worked before she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 She didn't?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was unusual in those days wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 She didn't work after she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No, no, no. She had enough to do with six children. But she really did work hard, you 
know, I mean to say - used to make all their clothing and - you know, do everything that she could in the way of - in the house. And there used to be a funny old lady used to live up on the top floor and all the children used to run to carry her basket an
d
 my mother used to say to me, now you're not to take anything from - you do that for a la - you know, a labour of love, you know, and we used to carry this basket right up over the top and when we got up the top there she'd give us a farthing. That was ou
r labour of love - so we didn't get paid for the rest of the day. Yes. Oh my word.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 In which house did you live the longest when you were a child - in Fifth Avenue?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No - well, I lived in nine, Sixth Avenue when I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  and then from there we went up to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, Fifth Avenue - I moved to Fifth Avenue when I was seven years old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How many rooms were there in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 There was one, two - four upstairs I think - yes, yes. There'd be four down I think then. Yes, four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The kitchen and the scullery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, four down. 'Course they had a bathroom there - little bathroom at the back in those days, you know. Yes, they had a little bathroom.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 They were superior things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Oh they were f
irst class house you see and they had one of the biggest gardens on Queens Park - longest gardens, yes. We used to have a - a little glass house and we had a swing in there, I can always remember it, you know, and swinging out through to this glasshouse.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did anyone else live with you - any relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or lodgers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother have anyone to help her in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, used to do it all her own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was the washing done at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother or father mend or make the family clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, my father used to have to do all the boots and shoes and look after them and clean them. He used to line them up you know, all of them clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother make any clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, she used to make all the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 children\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  clothes - yes. Coats and perhaps somebody'd have a dress that could be cut down and that used to do for somebody else and - it was marvellous really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you couldn't run up a dress in a day in those days could you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh no, and you - you didn't get them, you know, straight out of the shops and that sort of thing. They had to sit down and make do and mend, you know, and so they - they was very industrious.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your clothes were always new - you never had to have secondhand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, used to have them you know, made - they was always new.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You never bought any hardly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But you bought shoes - you didn't have these made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we had to have - we - they bought shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 They bought them ready made?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes. But my father always used to see to them, you know, see that they was in good repair and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father help your mother with any jobs in the house like cleaning, cooking, washing up, the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, he wasn't so - you know - like my own husband, you know, he was very domesticated but I don't think my father was that way inclined.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he do any decorating or repairs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, he never did any of that - no. But my own hus
band he wasn't very good at decorating but he would cook a dinner as good as I could cook it, you know. Marvellous he was. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your father ever dressing or undressing or bathing you - reading to you or telling you stories or anything like that?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, he'd always do it if - you know, was needs be, but he wasn't one that would - you know, would do - regular thing, no. Had to do it or if mother was ill or anything like that he'd put his hand to the wheel.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever go out with your father without your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, we used to go out Sunday mornings. He used to take us up - used to be Kensington Gardens then, you know, through Sussex Gardens into Kensington Gardens and we used to go around the statues and fountains - 
I don't know whether you know it at all - Peter Pan, you know, little Peter Pan. He used to take us there - we used to stand for hours watching Peter Pan. And along the Serpentine, you know, in the boats. It was lovely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father look after you if your mother had to go out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I - she very seldom ever went out. No, she had too much to do - too much to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any tasks you had to carry out regularly at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, indeed yes. We had the - always on a Saturday mornin
g we had to do the silver and - you know, whatever little jobs there were to be done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. They all helped - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What kind of things would they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Dust and all sorts of things we had to, you know, make
 ourselves busy. We never and same by doing little sewing jobs and that you know. Used to have to mend different things - we didn't have to go out to play then, we had to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 After you left school did you have to do things at home as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes
, yes, we - I used to - well, I used to go to tennis after - when I - school you know. I used to go up to - Paddington Recreation ground and I mean they would never think of doing a thing like that today would they - walk all the way up to Paddington - th
at's after school we used to go up there and play tennis.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did the older children help the younger ones with things they found difficult?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, my eldest brother, he was really most helpful. You know, he'd do anything for me - he'd run and get m
y milk anyway. And he used to be - you know - put me through it too - used to put me up on top of a cupboard and leave me there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember them helping you with dressing or eating when you were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes. Yes, we would really help one another. We were very united family - very united.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And the younger ones would help the older ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you expected to go to bed at a certain time in your schooldays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, had to be to bed sharp at eight o'clock in the school time - always had to be in bed by eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother or anyone else put you to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well sometimes we went on our own and then we used to get up to pranks at times and father'd come and promise us but we'd be playing obstacle races -
 over the bed with a pillow and one thing and another, you know. We made our own enjoyment - we did enjoy ourselves more so than they do today, you know, we always found something to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How old were you when you started to put yourself to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, about - seven or eight - we used to go to bed on our own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you share the bedroom with anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My youngest sister - this was the one I was always brought up with, you know, the youngest one - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My two brothers - you see, my two brothers and - of course they were growing up you see when we were - young.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 They'd have another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, they had a - the two boys were downstairs as a matter of fact.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you had enough room just to have two in each room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That was unusual in those days wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Houses were smaller on the whole weren't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What room did you bath in - you had a bathroom you said?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, there was a ba
throom in - Fifth Avenue but of course we never had a bathroom in the police station - used to have a hip bath in front of the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How often did you have a bath - did you have a ritual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, once a week - yes, but we - we, you see, you had 
to be careful because you couldn't be when anybody was about you know, you had to - either they'd gone to bed or something had happened you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there a ritual like bath and clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Always kept very clean indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You had your clean clothes after the bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. And of course - we used to always put them out and when my mother - you know when we come in from Sunday school we was always sent to Sunday school every Sunday - we used to go three times as a matter of fact, I 
used to go Sunday mornings, Sunday afternoons and Sunday evenings to church - and when we come home from church we was got our hangers and pegs and covers in those days, used to have to cover our clothes all over and keep them clean and keep the dust from
 
them. But mum was very strict on all that you know and we had to brush our own clothes down and keep them clean. Yes, I don't think they stop to do that these days - they just throw them down don't they. But I mean my grandchildren, they come in they thro
w their clothes down, they never think to hang them up. If it's mother that has to gang them up but my mother never had to hang mine up - no, or my sister's. Always see to their own clothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where did you eat your meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 In the - police station. 
Fifth Avenue - yes - well, there used to be a big back room and we used to be all in there because it was the - by the conservatory and we used to love to look out onto this glass place and - and so we used to love to look out there - look to the garden b
ecause it was a beautiful garden, you know. They said it was one of the longest on Queens Park, those gardens in thirty-nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where did your mother cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 We had a stove you know, and then a gas stove. Yes, we had a gas stove.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And this was in another room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Kitchen. The little kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what time you had breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well we had to have our breakfast like - you know, just before going to school. You know, used to have it - get up and be ready - we had to be ready on time too. Mother used to see that we did get there to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you all have it together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, no, all different - all different times. Yes, yes, yes. All different times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you usually have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh well, tha
t's going back a bit. Now, we had - used to have cereals and - and you know, toast and marmalade and - those sort of things, we still had those. Yes. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have anything different on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh there was always the meat and the roast, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Yorkshire}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 and - of course being my parents was Norfolk it was Norfolk dumplings and of course they did it in a different way because they see that you had your Norfolk dumpling before you had your dinner so you wouldn't want much dinner. Yes, we always had 
the dumpling before with the gravy you know but it really was marvelous.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you eat anything different for breakfast on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well I suppose we did really - sausages or something like that, you know, be a bit extra for Sunday morning. I supp
ose there was more time really to have it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother or father bake their own bread or make jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Make her cakes - we used to make - every week she used to make - big, you know, tin cake and used to cut up for the whole of the week and a big slab cake, I can always remember that you know - wonderful how they - you know, the current -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did she make jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, she used to make a jam - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But not bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no bread - no. Of course that's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did she bottle any fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well she had to do all those sort of things you know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You had it in the garden did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did she make wine or medicine for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, I don't remember her doing that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there any beer brewed for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. I don't remember her doing that - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father and mother grow their own vegetables and fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. Of course they do today don't they - I would say the young people today they've got the advantages of all t
heir big gardens and places.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they buy any tinned or dried vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
I don't remember them really buying - buying a lot of dried stuff. It used to be always in the - in the fruit and - yes - but I think I do remember most is going once a year to Norfolk you know to my mother's home. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 And we used to - in the holidays, you know, the August holidays, we used to go for a month there and there was a beautiful - field and all I can remember is this corn waving backwards and forwards with 
the poppies - you know - the poppies and the corn, 'course that all had to be sorted out but still it - well, it looked to me, you know, it was really beautiful to wake up in the morning and see that. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. And in Norfolk they got these tea roses, you know,
 and they're all round the doors and - they're cream and white doors and they really looked wonderful, how they - and I can always remember that - holidays, you know. They used to - I suppose it was better for them to go home - although my mother was neve
r well when she went home - was the funny thing about it. She was always - yes, but she was very poorly when she went home you know, she never - seemed to enjoy her holiday like we did. We used to have a good time when we were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they keep any livestock for the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh my word - my brother he used to have the chickens and he used to mark the eggs and blow the eggs and - have them all specimens you know, oh yes, I - I can always remember my eldest brother, you know, used to be cleaning the he
n-house out and you know, regimenting them up to bed of a night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you ate the eggs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, we had some lovely eggs - lovely eggs, yes, and chickens.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How many times a week did you eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, no, I really can't remember that on
e but we - we always used to have a good meal you know, would say, and can always remember we never went without - generally you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have tinned meat at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 We didn't have tinned food then in those days - no. And it used to be - the Ho
me and Colonial and you know that was a beautiful place to shop in, you know, the meat and that - it was beautiful meat. I think better than what it is today - it had the flavour with it. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever get extra meat such as rabbit from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. We used to bring them back from Norfolk. Rabbits - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That was in summer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. But of course you don't get them now do you not like those rabbits you used to get in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember ever seeing your mother have less food so that the family could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well she was always going without. She was a wonderful mother. Wonderful mother. Always going without, you know, she'd always see we had everything we wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father have more food than the rest of the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, mother always tried to make it so that he had, you know, all the food. And gave him a good dinner when he come home. I don't know that he always wanted it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you allowed to talk during meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Well, we wer
e brought up pretty strict, you know, at the table - we had to behave ourselves and there was not much rudeness going on - there's more rudeness today than what there was in those days.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Could you choose what you wanted to eat from what was cooked or did you have to have a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well we had to have what was there - we wasn't to - yes, we had to try it, yes. And - well, everything that everybody else didn't want I was the one that had to eat it I might tell you that one. Give it to dustbin - she'll eat it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What was your parents attitude if you left some food on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh I don't know that we ever left anything. Didn't get the chance to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If there was something on the table you wanted like the salt could you ask someone to pass it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. You could ask them to pass it - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Could you ask for a second helping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh if we wanted it, yes, certainly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And sit in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh no, no. You could read that afterwards but you couldn't have that at the table.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When could you leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Whey they'd finished - when everybody's finished b
ut they don't today - they move off before but - we always used to wait 'til everybody was finished and then we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did everybody sit at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. And when - when we all started courting, you know, going out we had quite a to do then on
 a Sunday. They used to bring their young men and - you used to have tickets to go upstairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you always sit in the same place at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, our own places to sit in - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who used to serve the meal to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My mother really - and my father would cut the meat. He'd always cut the meat on the Sunday - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What order were you served in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The little ones first - used to serve the little ones first. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember where your younger sister sat before she was old enough to feed herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
In a high chair. Yes, they had the high chair, yes. And of course - years - that I remember the pushchair that we once had - it had a back to it, you know, and you sat back to back, you know, and of course when my youn
gest sister come to town I wouldn't sit in that - I had to walk so I walked everywhere after that. I didn't sit there - no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was your mother an easy person to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did she show affection?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If you had any worries could you share them with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, we always fly to our mother for everything - yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was your father easy to talk to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12322054\charrsid9327351  he}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 was - he was a very good father - he was very strict, you know, law was law with him but if he said a thing
 he meant it and that's what I think that it wants today - people like him. You know, he would never - he'd never be - you know, I mean to say he was always good to us, you know, I mean in the - in the best way he could be. Even when we were naughty you k
now I say he'd come and promise a thing but he'd never hit us or anything like that. But the promise was enough for us. We'd know what to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did your parents expect you to behave towards them - did they expect you to show them respect?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh we
ll we - they didn't have to let us show - we did love our mother and father - all of us - we thought the world of them. Yes, we thought the world of our mother and father.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they bring you up to behave towards your brothers and sisters in certain ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, we loved all of them, you know, loved each other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they say you should hit back if another child hurt you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 We'd got to stand up for ourselves - yes, we had to stand up for ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What kind of people do you think your parents hoped you would grow up to be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, I only wish she could have seen us all grown up and from their labours because my mother must have been a wonderful woman to bring us all up, you know, like that. Must have been a marvelous woman to brin
g it up on that - you know, little money like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents bring you up to consider certain things important in life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes, we was always to respect everybody and - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did they think of swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh - no, that's right out of the question. Yes, they didn't believe in any of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we had to wait 'til they'd finished and then we could have our little say if we wanted to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If you did something your parents disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well we'd get a smack I expect. I believe that's all we used to get - little tap anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would this be from usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, my mother would just tap us to say we weren't to do that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your father smacking you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, as I say he only promised us - he used to have a leather strap what he used to wear in the police you know and he used to come with that and show us what he would do to us but he never did it. The promise was enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember a particular occasion when you were punished?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, well you'd get sent to your room - stop up there, you know, sent to bed sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember this happening to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No
, not really but I know that if you did do anything we got sent to our room - we got sent to bed sometimes if we did anything very naughty. You know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember how you all felt about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, a disgrace really wasn't it to - I would say we felt ashamed of ourselves.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Would you say you received the ideas you had about how to behave from both your parents or did one play a more important part than the other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, both of them was very - very good indeed. I mean to say - we couldn'
t have had two - two better parents than what we had. And I think that the only thing I do wish that they could have seen - you know - the results and fruits of their labours. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you had a birthday would it be different from any other day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh well, now, mother tried to do her best for us, you know, I mean to say she'd try and find whatever she could to give us. We used to be in clothing to tell you the truth - mostly in clothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you receive any presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, mostly clothin
g you see we would receive which was - grateful thing in those days because they didn't want toys and that sort of thing, you know, so much they get today that they don't know what to do with do they - the children get too many toys. If they were to get c
lothing that would help in life, you know, I think it would be much better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have anything special to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh we always had a cake or something. Yes, we always had a cake - family cake.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any friends round or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh, we was all full - the - the house was always more or less full because as I say a big family and you'd always have plenty of friends. Yes, there was quite a lot of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember anything you did with your mother and father on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
We - we used to have to, you know, try and give them surprises as much as they gave us surprises, you know, and we tried to do our best to, you know, get little bits of things to give them as surprise.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was Christmas Day a special day in the family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, yes. 'Course we used to hang up our stockings by the fireplace, you know and I remember, you know, they used to pull tricks on us sometimes - they put an onion and a piece of coal and anything they could think of in it, you
 know. Yes. And then of course the next - the next stocking to it would be the real thing. But we always used to hang it up at night. Of course they - in years - later years you'd be hanging pillowcases, we didn't hang the stockings they was too small - o
h we wanted pillowcases then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any musical instruments in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, we had a lot of musical people. There was my sister she played the mandolin and - well, her husband people played the piano very well indeed you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were all at home together did she play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we all used to - you know - show our little bit of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there anyone in the family who sang?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I used to sing. Yes, I used to sing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you make music together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, that's right - as a family. Used to make our own music - that's what I said, we used to enjoy ourselves in, you know, very different way to what they enjoy themselves today. Their enjoyment is not our enjoyment you know - it wouldn't be our enjoyme
nt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents play games with you at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, when they could - had the chance to. But of course with them, you know, I mean to say it was hard work, they had to keep going at whatever things there were to be done, you see. I mean the
re was boot mending and all sorts of things to be done when they had spare time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there books in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, my eldest brother was all books, you know, yes, he was all books - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have newspapers in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, yes. Yes, and of course we had that - Sunday paper and the Indicator - and we had that everyday - the Indicator. And that was eight - a ha'penny and a penny you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And it was a local paper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes, 
yes. Mrs Beck said she would have liked to have seen that about Mr Blackall because she used to live opposite him, you know, in Kilrabit Street. And she said she would like to have read that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your mother and father reading?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, t
hey didn't have much time for that. She was always sewing - always - as I remember - her - machining or sewing - yes, machining - machining or sewing, yes. She was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 machining}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 , sewing, washing or ironing you know. Plenty to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your parents reading aloud to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
I mean there was no time to sit there and look at television or anything like that, you know, there - there was something doing all the time in the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember them reading aloud to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh my father would always sit down and read everything out of the paper to her. As she was doing her work, yes. If she was working he'd sit and read the paper to her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember a funeral in the family when you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My mother and father were the first one me knew.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My - my mother died in 1914 and my father died in '24.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When your mother died who went to the funeral - did you all go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we all went to the funeral.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have mourning clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes, yes. We went to Paddington, you know, they were buried in Paddington Cemetery - like today they're cremated but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you all had special clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes. We have a family grave up in Paddington Cemetery. There's only room
 now for one but most of them - you know, I prefer cremation really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you taken out visiting neighbours or friends or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh well my father used to take us out Sunday morning regularly - he used to take us up into the park and all tho
se sort of places. Because it was near Hyde Park then you see, quite near Hyde Park.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go visiting at all - friends or neighbours or relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes, well - over the road - opposite us was a bakers and - they were Germans but very, 
very nice people - I've never had such nice people and there was a girl - I forget her name now - but anyway we used to go over there regularly to tea and we'd always be looking forward to some nice cakes with them being a bakers. Yes. And - the Mullers w
as their name but they was really nice - very nice people. Violet - I've just thought of her name - yes, Violet Muller.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents ever take you all out to see relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, you see those - the relations then - of course they were Norfol
k people you see. We got taken home to see you know the grandparents - annual - annually you know - the - we used to go there about a month - well, school holidays I believe - sometimes the whole of the school holiday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you ever taken out shopping?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes. We had to go out shopping with mother - yes, yes. Holding on her tail.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever go out with just your father - oh yes, on Sunday morning to the park?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember any other outings with your parents like at Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well - you didn't really - well, the only thing you went is to the parades up in the park. They used to have the horse parades, you know, have all the horses all dressed up, you know, and the different vans and different things, you kn
ow, all - but we did used to go to that - I remember - what I can remember that - you know, going to that. Yes. Regents Park I believe that was - Regents Park - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you went to Norfolk for holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You went regularly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Every August - the holiday time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did you go for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
All depend but - it mostly was three weeks and perhaps a month if it was - you know we wasn't feeling just the thing and could stay on a bit longer or something like that. But it nev
er suited my mother funny enough - she was always anxious to get back again - it always upset her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did all of you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, well mother and - mother took us down and then perhaps dad'd come and fetch us back again, you know, but he'd have to be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He'd stay at home because he'd be working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, that's right - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember anything special about the holidays - the things you liked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5252251\charrsid9327351 lovely.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  I said that we got up in the morning and we looked out onto a field of c
orn, you know, with all poppies and - corn swaying, you know, it was lovely. Yes, I did used to love that. And then of course we used to go out in a little trap, you know, they had a little trap and - my granddad used to drive at the back, you know, and w
e used to sit up the side in the front. We used to enjoy that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It would be so different than here wouldn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. It was only like a roundy sort of trap, you know, and got up two steps you know, to get in but we used to love to do that, yo
u know, to jump up in this trap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Could you tell me how you spent Saturdays in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well - well when we was - when we was at school we used to come home and we had to do - we used to have a little conservatory at the back and - one of use 
used to have to clean that out, you know, and tidy it up and do the floor and that and then we would have all the silver to clean and - we were kept busy I can tell you. We didn't have any - you know - Saturday we very seldom went to play like, you know, 
on a Saturday. We had work and jobs to do on a Saturday. And - during the week, you know, of course, as I say, I was able to go and play, you know, tennis or anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But Saturday was your housework day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. We had to do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What about the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, they all did their share, you know, and of course - I had a letter from my brother the other day funny enough - he said - I've just painted my back door cherry red and cream, not so bad, he says, for seventy-nine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you do on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well - in latter years of course we went to church and went to Sunday school in the morning, Sunday school in the afternoon, church in the evening. Then came home and had to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you wear different clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, y
es. Oh, we had to keep our best clothes for our best clothes - and - and - yes - then we had to cover them up like we did the book and, you know, put them away for the next Sunday. But, I mean, you mustn't leave things about like they do today - throw all
 over the place, you know, you had to put them up tidily onto the pegs and things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you play games on Sundays at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we had to be very good on a Sunday as a rule - we could look at books on a Sunday you know - and -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents think it wrong to work or play on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, they did - yes, they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents attend a place of worship?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No, they didn't. But of course as I say with mother and her home and that I thought she had quite enough really and I
 mean - although - my husband, he always went to church with me, you know, but I don't think they had the time then because they had such a big family, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your father didn't go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, he went - like in - on different occasions like - yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What denomination was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Church of England. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there any Sunday school outings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, yes, indeed - that's where I met my husband was Sunday school outing. Yes, we went to Ruislip and - he was playing ball with another fe
llow and he was throwing this ball up and all of sudden it hit me in the ear and he never forgot to keep coming and asking me did it hurt me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 As an excuse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. He kept on asking did - you sure it doesn't hurt you. I said, well it does but I sup
pose it'll go off, you know, so - made excuses for myself and - of course in the end that was the - landed me up for my courting days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there any other social activities organized by the church that you took part in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, there was the Cant
ata that my youngest sister, you know, she went as an Indian and what - I was an English girl in that I remember that - we had to all say our different lines and things. But they was more interested in young people in those - in those days, I thought they
 were anyway. You know, they'd give them something to do which I think they're lacking today - they don't have enough to do - they don't give them enough to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes. I was in the choir. Yes. That was where my singing part come in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there any activities connected with that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, they used to take us - I had a Mr Gilpin there and he took me to the Queens Hall, you know, used to take me occasionally to Queens Hall to hear the orchestra there. And - you
 know like they have the proms now - that was the same sort of thing only it was at the Queens Hall then instead of Albert Hall. And - where else did we go now - trying to think where we went to - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did the church run any temperance club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes,
 they had their social - yes. Oh yes - oh, I'll tell you a funny thing there where we did go to one night we went to a - play and - there was fellow came on and he was dressed as a clergyman and of course our own, the Vicar was in the front row and - and 
h
e said the wages of gin was breath you see and of course instead of the wages of sin are death. And of course he said - I'll have no more - we thought it was part in the piece you know, and he said - I'll have no more and of course he got him sent off the
 stage. But I thought it was rather comical. But we did enjoy ourselves you know, seeing that happen, we thought it was really a drama.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You never took the pledge or joined any temperance club did you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. No. Well I never have drunk so it wouldn't matter whether I took the pledge or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any other clubs organised by the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, they - they always had these - social affairs, you know, like - Monday evenings it used to be as a rule - yes. And having little conce
rts and that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was grace said at meals in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Sometimes - yes. Sometimes - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would say it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, we'd all have to say it, you know, before we sat down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you taught to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, always - always had to say our prayers - yes. Of course we had to kneel at the side of the bed, you know, then, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever have family prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. We always did it privately at night - when we went to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well - yes. And of course in the p}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 lice he had to be concerned with - in them - those days, you know, there was always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He was Conservative?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. My husband - my husband was different - but I mean my father was Conservative Conservative.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Why do you think he held these views?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, because - you know, they was thought of as being, you know, responsible, you know, I think that's the sort of thing, you know, they felt responsible for their duties.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know if he had any feelings }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5252251\charrsid9327351 about}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  whether the working man had a square deal or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, as I say, they took life so different, they looked at life in a different way, you know. They was grateful and thankful for what they were receiving but today they're not grateful.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, she didn't have much to take - she had hard time to look after the children let alone politics. She had her work well cut out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You don't know what her views were if she had any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't - no, not in that respect because, you know, she had to always - doing something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your father voting in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That - 1919? Oh yes, he always voted - v
oted Conservative, yes, but - now like my husband was different and I'm different and I would never vote against him up 'til last year and I butted out, you know, and it's very funny like that - you don't like doing these things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother vote - women got the vote in 1918 - did your mother vote then?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, oh, they did their duty to all and sundry.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know what party she would vote for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The same as dad - yes, yes. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 
That was what I was just saying to you, you see, I would
n't vote against my husband although I'm Liberal and he's - Labour and - I wouldn't vote against him because I thought he ought to know better than I did as far as it went but not that I don't think he did really.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 In some places at that time men felt that they risked losing their jobs or their house if they voted differently from their employer.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That's right - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know if your father ever felt under this pressure?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well - I think they were more satisfied in those days - people g
ot to get so they weren't satisfied of life are they, I mean to say, that's how I thought it had come about all of it, you know, but of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You don't think he felt he would lose his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was your father a member of a political party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You don't remember him working for the party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Nor your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents take part in any political activity other than at election time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, he was - he was concerned in th
ings in life, you know, he was very concerned about it all, you know, and he was very intelligent, you know, but everything that was going on. But their views in life was different to the views in life today, you know, I mean to say, what they saw in life
 was different to what it is - in fact I thought it was far better really - in some respects. I don't say in every respect but in some respects it was better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When your parents were not doing their work how did they spend their time? Do you remember them having any spare time activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well not really, I mean, they was always working, always doing something you see, and I mean that's the one to keep you going. No. No. Yes, yes. She was always sewing or doing something - oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your mother didn't have any interests outside the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. Well, she didn't have the time to have any interests then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember her going out to enjoy herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, only shopping, you know, I think we both used to enjoy that - this shopping business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When did your father get home from work in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh he was on all times - on nights and all sorts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Of course, he was a policeman wasn't he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, he did all times - all hours. And of course when they us
ed to get sent away on special of course he was a special policeman that he got, you know, they had to look after Royalty and that sort of thing and he'd get specially to do it he - you never knew when he was coming home - no, not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When he wasn't working how did he spend his evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Mending boots or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He'd spend them at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he go to any clubs or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father take part in any sport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't - well, I'
ll tell you what he did - he was - and he was very up in boxing and that - he never boxed or anything but he was very - know every boxer in the country. Yes, he knew what they did and the weights and everything else. He was interested in that always.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he go and watch boxing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I think it was that he had to struggle when he was in the police for different lines. Made him tough - made him tough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he go and watch boxing matches?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, of course we never had no wireless or - I mean television you know, to see anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he ever go to the races?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, he had to go to the races for the - on duty. No, not for the pleasure, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he bet at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your parents belonging to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You couldn't bet on his money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember them belonging to any savings clubs like boot clubs or sick clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, they had to - I - I think - didn't they always have to pay, on and off duty business on a Wednesday when 
they got their pay or something - I believe they did that, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No sort of clubs where people come round collecting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no, no, no, no. Don't remember any of them, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No weekly payments towards shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. And of course the 
family grew older the older ones was able to do a bit for the family - supporting it you see. I mean to say when you get only one and two you've got to wait 'til that one or two grow up but with a big family the big - the big ones had to look after the li
ttle ones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get on with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, lovely. Happy family all of us.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there one you felt particularly close to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, my eldest brother. And he felt for me too, you know, he used to think the world of me
, specially when I arrived he was going to earn all the milk he could for me and - all that. Yes. And he was a bit of a terror the way he used to play tricks on me, you know, put me up on the wardrobe and on the top of the cupboard and go away and leave m
e
 - 'cos he was six foot something and somebody said to me the other day - how - how was it my son was as tall - he's six foot seven. And I said, well, my brother was tall, my father was tall and I said that's all I can make out of it - it must be somethin
g that runs through the family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You're quite tall aren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I'm five foot eight I think - five foot seven or eight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 As a child who did you play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My youngest sister - used to tease her - I'd torment her - she used to be fond of dolls and I was fond of trains and I must have }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 the right man for he was the one that was fond of trains too. Yes, he did fifty-eight years on the Great Western so - he knew a few - a bit about trains. I think he knew everyone in and out Paddin
gton and the time they should take and how many stops they should make and all sorts. His life was with it all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you play with the neighbours at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, in the police station you see you had so many there - when we were in the p
olice station we were all - you know, all together. It was like a whole gang of us used to play together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you lived in Fifth Avenue did you play with neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Fifth Avenue - well, no we didn't go out there very much not to - 'course we h
ad such a lovely garden, you know, we had a swing and there wasn't that many - necessity to go out to get pleasure. You found plenty in the garden and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You played mainly in the garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember what games you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, I was ever so fond of tennis and I - and when I first, you know, started I always wanted to get - do - play with bat and ball and tennis, you know, and all sorts of things. I used to walk every tea - you know, after I'd had me tea and walk up to th
e Paddington recreation ground, I don't think they'd do that now - and - I used to call for three different friends - chums, you know, there was three of us and I was the fourth one and we'd go up there and spend the evening and that's how we had our plea
sure then and it really was very nice - very nice indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you play in the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh well, I don't think we went out much in the winter time, you know. You'd never see us roaming the streets like they do today, you know, I mean to say, y
ou had to - well, be doing some sewing or something like that, you know, occupying your mind as my mother would say. Just get something and occupy your mind.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you free to play with anyone you pleased? Did your parents discourage you from playing with some children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not really. I don't think so. No, we just chose who we wanted, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any sort of youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, not with my - my son, he was - I got him in the Brigade and the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 
Lifebuoys}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 , you know, he belonged to. I don't remember, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were at school did you have any hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, you had these plastic things and, you know, had to make different models and that sort of thing but it was mostly cutting out - the dresses and apron
s and that sort of thing. Used to have little patterns to cut out of and used to pin 'em on to the apron and cut them out, you know, something that was - going to be useful to you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, we had plenty - birds and cats an
d dogs. My father was full of these. And I always remember one dog we had I put my - I had some suede gloves and I laid them on the bed and when I went up all I could see was the fingers of them. So that dog had to go. He said he wasn't having a dog there
 that went to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, was always collecting all sorts of things, you know. Matchbox covers and all the different ones of them and, you know, where they used to come from Sweden and Norway and all over the place. Use
d to have them - Ship matches they - do you know how much they used to be dozen - penny, penny a dozen - penny a dozen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you used to collect these?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, all the covers from the boxes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you do any gardening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, I'm very fond
 of gardening - very fond. Yes, very fond. We all had our little bits of garden, yes, yes, and where we were in Fifth Avenue, see, we got a big garden there that we could have our little separate patches, you see. But - I - I'm very fond of gardening, I'm
 - flowers and that - I always have been all my life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go fishing or for walks or cycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I used to do cycling. Yes, and I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who did you go cycling with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I met my husband like that again. Round and round the block. Yes, used to go out to - for outings, you know, from school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go walking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, I was always walking. Yes, I used to love walking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would you go with - your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, with my friends and sister and, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you take part in any sport apart from tennis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well - table tennis - I used to love table tennis, you know, all - any - anything to do with tennis and bat and ball.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where would you play table tennis?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Home - yes, at home - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to any theatres or concerts or music halls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, but one of us that was a theatre goer was my eldest sister. She never missed a theatre. She was very fond of theatres.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were at school do you ever remember going to the theatre?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The on
ly thing I can remember is going to the - Queens Hall as I tell you, every Saturday used to go. Used to call and take me there every Saturday evening. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember going to the music hall?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, we do. Up at the Metropolitan - we'
d been up there, you know, in Edgware Road there's the Metropolitan theatre. It isn't there now - its all down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you go often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Occasionally, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Cinemas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. No. The only thing I can remember is - when they used to have
 a penny affair, you know, used to go up in the - see that sometimes but there was nothing much then - not in those days - not like those now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents give you any pocket money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, yes, we had our fair share of - you know - sweets and things, you know. They used to give us what they did give us, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was it regular or not - was there a set amount each week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, sometimes they'd give us, you know, Saturday they'd give us a little pocket money if we did anything, you kn
ow, good - like done any cleaning or anything like that we used to get a little bit extra sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Any idea how much it was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, wasn't much I know. Wasn't - because the things weren't the same price as what they are today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would give it to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Either my father or my mother, you know, it all depends. My eldest brother later on, he used to lash out on me - you know, give me for doing things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you spend your pocket money on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not really, I mean to say - I don
't think that we was very extravagant in any of it really, I mean, you didn't have to be in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you buy sweets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Just a few, yes, but not all that amount - I have more sweets now than ever I did in those days I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did it cost you money to play tennis?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, you had to pay certain hours.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you used your pocket money for this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes, you had to use that, whatever you had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did anyone outside the home help your mother look after her house or family?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. Only when - as I say, when the older ones grew up and of course they did their bit towards the home. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If your mother was ill or confined to bed how did she manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 My eldest sister, when she was very ill, you know, she gave up her job and stayed with her all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I mean, they wouldn't do that today would they, I mean, they'd run away from it and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what happened when - you had one sister younger than you didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Only one sister, yes. She's two years younger than I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what happened when the younger ones were born? Who looked after the home - how did your mother manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I think the elder ones looked after and done things, you know
, I mean to say they were growing up then because there's - ten years difference between my eldest sisters. And with my youngest sister twelve years difference, you see, it makes a lot of difference, you see. And they was - they turned in and did their sh
are of work you see, in the home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, they were both Norfolk, you see, no - nobody. They - they made friends and they had lots of friends, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where would they see them - where would they meet their friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they'd come to see them I suppose, you know, they used to come and see them. }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Of course living in the building with the police and that you got all the policemen's wives and that, you see, that made a lot of difference to a person like that, you know.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you moved did this carry on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, couldn't - well, you see, we came up here which was a long way from the police station in those days you know, it was considered a long way away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember your mother having friends of her own apart from friends she shared with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Only with the police people, you know, the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 policemen\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  wives and that she used to-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father have his own friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes, he had his own. Mr Childers and
 he lives in - Loffdrop Street, well least his dead now, Mrs Jones is still there - she's ninety something. Now, Mr Childers used to take me round the police stations when I was a little one and show me to all the policemen because I was such a bonny baby
. Yes, that's Mr Childers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would your father go out with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes. Used to meet and - different places with one another, you know, if there was anything on that would interest them at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were friends ever invited into the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, well - when, you know, any necessity for them to come, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would they be offered things to eat and drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would this just be particular days and occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, well, I mean to say - Sundays and that sort of t
hing when you had a bit more time to spare, you know, see, in the week you were so busy you couldn't really - you know - do much at all and do your work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you say the friends that came were mainly your mother's friends or your father's friends or were they mutual friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Mutual. Mutual.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did friends call in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, sometimes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And did neighbours call in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we, yes - we had one or two nice neighbours, you know. Different -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It wouldn't be a formal arrangement - they'd pop in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, they'd just pop in - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents ever go out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not very much - I don't think they had the time really to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 People often tell us that in those days they made their own amusements.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What do you think your parents did when they got together with their friends or neighbours - did they have music or play games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well - yes, well, it was mostly the gramophone I can remember that, 
you know, little old gramophone, I can remember that going away. Yes, and of course there was round records then, you know, you had to push them onto the - it's so different
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they play games?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes. Dad used to play draughts and that sort of thing, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would they play with their friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes. Yes, he was very good with card playing. Marvellous.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Many people divide society into different social classes and groups - in that time before 1918 did you think of some p
eople belonging to one class or group and some to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well of course they did divide themselves, its no mistake about that, you know, they would say there was the rich and the poor and - that was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That was how you would subscribe to it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes - the rich and the poor. But some of the rich was very good and some of the poor was very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Which class or group would you say you belonged to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, middle really - middle class would be, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What sort of people belonged to the same class as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well they was mostly post office and police and that you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 People with a good steady job?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, steady jobs and reliable, you know, reliable people in those days. That was - you know, how 
to be trustworthy to have the job that they had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What sort of people belonged to the poorer class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was dustmen and all those sort of people that did have the rough jobs, there's no mistake about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The people with the rougher jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What sort of jobs did the rich have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, they're all government and all that sort of thing weren't they, those days, mostly government people, you know, railway - you know, that was in authority.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The top railway people and that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember being brought up to treat people of one sort differently form people of another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, now. We had to, you know, be - you know, gracious to everybody like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you ever told to curtsey?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Show respect?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who did you have to curtsey to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well those that - up above you see or you thought was above you. But you didn't know whether they were above you or not but you just done it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there anyone you called Sir or Master or Madam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, always Sir. Always Sir. Always have the Sir and we always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would you call Sir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, whoever we thought was in authority over us and - and even to your school - master, school teacher, you know, you'd always a
ddress them the proper way and always tap at the door when you go in and out places and - they don't do it today, and they don't even - well, they haven't got the manners I don't think, some of them to do that sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember anyone doing the same sort of thing to your parents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh yes, yes. The tradespeople always called her Madam, yes. They was well respected you know and if you do good by people I think they do good by you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 In the district who were considered the most important people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Now you've got me. Well, anybody that was in authority I should think was an important person, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you come into contact with people who you thought were important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, I mean when I - even when I went to the hospital, I mean, the Matron and that sort of thing, you know, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What about shopkeepers?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who did they associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well we had some very old people, you know, Mr Bail used to be down Harrow Road, you know, and we used to 
think the world of him, you know, got a nice chap he was - he had two sons and - they treated mother with every respect, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who did they associate with - what sort of friends would the shopkeepers make in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well mostly their own people aren't they - you know, shopkeepers - other shop-keepers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who did they clergy used to associate with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they didn't really do what they ought to have done I don't think to come round people - the only thing they did to my mother was 
- shock - give her the shock of her life. You know, they meet - met her in the wrong sort of attitude - he came and told her, what was it, you know, the sins had got of - when she was ill and that - that was the wrong thing to say to anybody, you know. I 
m
ean, instead of trying to buck you up all the time, you know, putting ton weight on her all the time, that's what I thought, you know, telling her that it was through her sins and - well, she'd been a good mother to us and that and it must have been very 
hard to hear that. Yes. But, yes, they had a different approach - you know, very different approach to what they do -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you notice who they mixed with - would they be regarded as very important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The clergy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes. Of cou
rse like with my husband and I - 'cos we attended St Jude's regularly and - you know, they were different people in those days, you know, they was more broad minded, you know, that - saw things in a different light you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would be the teachers' friends in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well their own people I suppose their own teachers, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 They didn't mix much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You probably didn't know any farmers round here did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. But the farmers was all together, you know, they was all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did the employers mix with everybody else?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Keep themselves to themselves I should imagine, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What sort of people would you say went to the church - was there a social difference between the people who went to church and t
hose who went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, I don't think you looked at it in that light, did you really, I mean to say, you took it as it came, you know, and you went to church and mixed amongst people of all denominations.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there any special social group of people who went to chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they did divide theirselves into chapel, church and - Methodist and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was there any difference in the standard of living of people who went to chapel? Were they a mixture or were they the better off people?

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, just a mixture. Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It wasn't divided?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember any friction between church and chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not that I can remember, you know, its - all got on all right together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Round here did all the people in the poorer class have the same standard of living or would you say that there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Groups yes, some had better jobs than others. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you know any people in this group - can you describe what the different groups would be like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I mean to say, if you had more money you was able to do more with it, weren't you, that was the thing about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You think it depended on their income?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Their incomes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you know any people in the poorer class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, plenty - plenty that went to St Jude's church I mean there was plenty that had plenty of money that went there, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there many poor people went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, the poor people went and mixed with the rich people. You know, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you think that one group felt itself superior to the rest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they did in - sometimes - yes, I think they did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were some families thought of as rough and others as respectable?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, very often we used to have rough families. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you remember a distinction of this kind between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, of course, you'd know a craftsman wouldn't you? I mean, he'd have to - serve an apprentice wouldn't he to be a Craftsman. But of course in latter - this last year or two i
n - on the railway you see they let them go in together - that's been a great - you know, hump against my husband really 'cos, you know, you serve your apprentice and that and - go all through and then you get somebody that comes in and can take over a jo
b from where you leave off sort of thing, it must be very annoying.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were young was there a distinction between craftsmen and labourers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, yes, yes, well of course, yes, well of course you see you went to have this education and you stood by it didn't you all the time.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your father and mother have the same attitude to people in different classes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well they tried to be decent to everybody I think, you know, they didn't - disrespect anybody, they just take them as they come
 sort of thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you think your mother saw herself as belonging to a particular social class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't think so. She just - tried to do her best in life and that was it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you think it was possible in those days to move from one class to another?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well you all tried to get on as best you can, you know, but of course there wasn't the opportunities that there are today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember any cases, like people you thought were in the poor class moving up one, do you remember an
y families round about you who got on in this way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they - they do - they have done, yes, yes, yes, they have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman or a real lady?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. You know the real }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 gentlemen}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  and the re
al ladies and - my grocer always used to say of my husband - he was a real gentleman - but he wasn't a gentleman. But then I suppose they called a gentleman a person that - you know - does all the things that he should do, right things, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And with a real lady you think this is what did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was how they behaved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How to behave, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did it have anything to do with what they earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was how they behaved?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember seeing a policeman around where you lived - this is silly for you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh plentiful. Couldn't get 'em out of my eyes sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your mother ever say I'll call a policeman when you were naughty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 She'd call dad. A look was as good as a promise with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How do you think the police treated the people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, they - not too bad I don't think, you know, say they were very kind I think in those days what they helped and done people - to do, people - I think they were very helpful to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was your home rented?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you see anything of the landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we had - we had the - oh, not the landlord, no. We had the man come and collect the rent every week well he doesn't come now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 This was on a Trust wasn't it - who did it come under then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well it was - the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Ecclesiastical}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  Commissioners wasn't it in the first place but of course it's been in so many hands and - there was only three hundred and something when it started but now we come up and up and up don't t
hey. And they've had so many people had them I mean you know very well they've been here a hundred years so somebody's made something out of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you feel about this Trust as landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, pretty severe I should imagine, you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were they good as a landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, oh yes, yes. They looked after everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember feeling when you were young that your parents had a struggle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Although they had a different - look to the places in those days. They put t
hings on that made them last, you know, used to have a varnish paper on every - where that was as dark and dull and dreary - there was nothing, you know, very - cheerful about it - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember feeling your parents had a struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
I guess they did anyway - I didn't know - you know, it's different my life to their life but - you can guess they had. But on the other hand - no - on the other hand as I say everything was so much cheaper, I mean, you wouldn't have got a dozen 
boxes of matches for a penny, you wouldn't get sugar a penny a pound would you. Penny farthing a pound sugar and then they managed to put a little thing on top of the sugar you know every time and - they used to have the bread and if it didn't weigh the a
m
ount that it should do, I couldn't imagine it today but still, if it didn't weigh they'd have a new loaf and cut that up and put it on as make-weight, you know, to make that weight up, you know, yes, so that the loaf should weigh exactly two pounds or wha
tever it might do - one pound and a half or - anything like that. And they used to cut a new loaf up in bits and put it on as a makeweight so you'd have a piece of bread on the top of your loaf }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 every time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  - you'd have your weight anyway - you'd get your weight.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I can't see that happening now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Gosh, I think the loaf had shrunk you'd still get it shrunk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you particularly aware as a child of the struggle to make ends meet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, as I tell you I only wish that my mother was here to see
 what she turned out in her life, you know, I mean to say she's had four girls and two boys and - who really, you know, credit to her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you ever remember your father being out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember him being off work through illness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No. No. Neither my husband. And my husband never had a day from school, would you believe that. My grandsons got his medals and - for punctuality and attendance and he's got all the medals - Philip has and - you know he never had a day off 
from school and he never had a day from off from work - only for his fingers, he lost all his fingers at work and - he's never had a day off ill - it's a record really - fifty-eight years is a long time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You would never have to get help from the Guardians or the parish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I wouldn't - no, no. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you given lessons by your parents, a tutor or a governess or did you go to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Went to school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How old were you when you first went?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Five years old. Five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you first started what time did you go in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Nine o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And what time did you come home?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 About half past four I think it was. Half past four.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You went from full time right from five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What kind of a school was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Elementary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 A Board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, elementary school isn't it - elementary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was it owned by the church or the council?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, the London - School Board for London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was it a mixed school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. No, separate - separate the boys school and the girls school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did it take you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, wouldn't take me long - about ten minutes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did anybody go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, the first two or three months you know but not for long - we soon found our way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who would go with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh my mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where did you have your mid-day meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, I used to love it, yes. I loved school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, I used to like a few of those too. Won't say all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they emphasise certain things as important in life - like manners?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Tidiness?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Punctuality?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And ways of speaking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh, we had the cane. And sharp at that. I never had it but still they did. And they used to have cardboard pointers, you know, and - they'd sometimes go to give you one
 with that and the thing would fly up in the air and that'd cause a disturbance. Cardboard - like a long stick they used to have with a red top and bottom, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they punish the girls the same as the boys?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes, yes. And there use
d to be a - headmaster up in the boys school. My husband went - he was terribly strict, Mr Bower, he didn't have any nonsense at all. I mean that's what they want a bit of today I think. I think - that's lacking, you know, today. But I mean they weren't c
ruel but they did knock sense into people - and they have no sense like that - not a proportion anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What sort of things would you get punished for? What would you get the cane for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh you'd have to do something drastically wrong, you know, be
fore you got the cane but - they'd stand it 'til they couldn't stand it anymore and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What would this be - something like talking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well - you wouldn't get the cane like for talking it was - disobedience of some sort, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents show an interest in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes. Liked to know how we were getting on and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they ask what you did at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they ever visit the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I think they had to - certain times, you know, they had certain days to go to visit the work you'd done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did they meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, and see what - how you getting on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did all the other children at school come from similar types of home to your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes. Mixed, mixed. They were mixed class, yes, it was a mixed class.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Some very poor children there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did the teachers single out certain children for different treatment from the others
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't think so. No, it was very fair really in those days for those sort of things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there any gangs when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. Don't remember anything - no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember any children who always seemed to be left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, you try not to leave them out I think - we used to anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go on to another school after this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we stayed at Droop Street school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 'Cos they didn't - you see, you didn't get the advantages that they get today of going to other schools, you see, and
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you finished at Droop Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, I mean like with my boy he got a chance of going somewhere different, you see, we didn't - we didn't get any choice of -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How old were you when you left?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Fourteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you have stayed longer if you'd had the opportunity?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I would have done, I - I used to like it so I suppose I should have done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to any evening classes when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, my son did - he went to - now what's the name of it - in Regent - Polytechnic in Regent Street, you know. He learnt Dutch there.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well of course things weren't the same, you know, in those days, not to what they are today. I think they have - you know - bet
tered the education more today to what they were in those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you think you benefited from going to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well I suppose I have really, I mean, I haven't done so bad have I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 While you were at school did you have a part time job or any means or earning any money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What was your first full time job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well I went to dressmaking to start off with but - although my eldest sister took to it I never did. And I used to roll the cotton across the floor to get up and 
to have a move round. It was so monotonous to have to sit but now I have to sit whether I want to or not.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get this job - were you apprenticed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I was recommended to a place, you know, near at hand so I could go. My sister went to 
Craven - Craven Road I think it was down by Paddington somewhere. Of course that was a distance to go then in those days and - she liked dressmaking but - I never used to - you know, it was too it - tedious to me to sit there all day like that, you know.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What exactly did you have to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, buttons and - well used to have a lot of this braiding and that sort of thing, it was very tedious job, you know, sewing it on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Hand sewing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember the hours you worked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, eight o'clock 'til about five I think it was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And Saturdays - did you work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't remember going in Saturdays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, never no holidays with pay. Not even my husband - he never had holidays with pay not 'til the last years he was at work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what you were paid when you first started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 About half a crown.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you feel it was a fair wage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, indeed I didn't, but of course, 
I mean, things weren't as dear as what they are today but - we had to do a lot with it - we had to do a lot with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you give any of the money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I don't remember really. I mean, I expect we had to do that because they're 
bound - you know, I mean they're bound to have a little bit from us, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How you get on with the other people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh very well, yes, very well indeed, yes, I think I'd get on with everybody - everybody like me in them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Very good indeed, yes, very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well - you just - you just been talking to me about old people. They had a grandma there - ninety - and they had to look after her and she -
 I think she too all the time - time of the person, you know, instead of looking after us she had to be running after this person all the time. But - we was left to ourselves a lot to get on with it, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You didn't like the work did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 O
h no, I - still one thing I used to deliberately knock the cotton off to go round and pick it up, you know, it - so monotonous sitting there so long. No break.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh about a twelve month. I didn't stay there any longer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Then what did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Then I went to the doctors and that was where I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  from there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you do at the doctors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, receptionist and house - well, to do with bits of tidying up in the house and all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But you were a doctors receptionist for the patients?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get this job?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Doctor Groves in - in Bishops Road. It was advertised I think - advertised.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you have to do at the doctor's?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Let the people in and - you know
, go down and tell them there's so and so here and then, you know, take the people - patients into the room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have to get cards out and things like this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  look}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351  them}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  up, you know, see where they were and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what hours you worked there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh, early in the morning. About six in the morning we got up, you know, and then we got going and - I don't think we left off 'til about five or six in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any breaks in between?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 We had - well then they had people come in the evening about six o'clock, you know, the patients came in again about six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have some time off in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, in the afternoon we used to get a break, you know, and go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He'd have a morning surgery and an evening surgery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, and then and evening surgery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Whilst he was out you'd have this time off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, that's right - yes, have the time off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have meals there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we had our meals - yes, we had our meals.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You had your lunch there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what you were paid there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 About twelve pounds a year, something like that. Not much more I know. Fourteen pounds perhaps - it was something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have to work Saturdays when you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No, not on Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have holidays with pay from them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes, you'd get that too - yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, always got that. Well, used to be twe
lve or fourteen I can't just remember. Not much more I know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you feel that this was a fair ware?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, I didn't think it was - not in those times. But of course I mean we'd never made a fuss of things in those days, you know, I mean like a lot
 of people creating these days we never used to make that fuss about, you know, money and that sort of thing. But they sort of idolize money today don't they - I mean, they want it, you know, I must have it sort of thing all the time. I mean it's like the
se dustmen I don't know what do they do want I thought they was getting twenty pound. They seem to be wanting more than that don't they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what year it would be when you started working for the doctor?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, you've got me there. I su
ppose I should have been about sixteen or seventeen I suppose - what would that be - don't know what year that'd be - I'm seventy-four aren't I - I was born in 1895. '14 I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  - not - was it 19 - 1917 I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It would be about 1911 when you started at the doctors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, in 1917 I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 . I was there about - was it five years - something like that I think and then I got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you give any of this money to your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes, we did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you know what she would spend it on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well going towards the - housekeeping, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get on with the other people there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Very well indeed. Yes, they liked me very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, fine. Yes, both Doctor Groves and Mrs Groves was very nice to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about him - did you like him as an employer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, I liked them both. They treated me very well indeed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you like this work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes, I was always very fond of 
hospitals and - you know, for the actual cleanness of the thing, you know, I always used to like it in hospital. 'Cos I - in 1917 I went as a V.A.D., you know, to the hospital.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  in 1917?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, but in - in October I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  and I took up the V.A.D. you see I was there for - for the duration of the war. Now when did they end - '18 was it - 1918.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was this a voluntary job - did you get paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, you got paid but - it was called V.A.D. but - of course that's - V.A.D. fro
m the St Johns Ambulance, you know, they could put you in any job that they thought you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you do there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 I was on the telephone and then I was on the telesceum - that's to do with the bedrooms of all the, you know, officers' rooms and
 that - the telesceum, you know, there's about seven hundred and fifty beds there.}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Which hospital was this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The Marylebone Road, you know, King Edward VII hospital for officers. All officers in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what hours you worked there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
On Sundays - we had one Sunday off and one Sunday on. The one Sunday we was on we worked for about seven to seven at night. Yes. And - we didn't get any time off in the week, I don't know what our hours - our hours was better in the week, you k
now, we didn't work quite such long hours in the week and got breaks you know, in between. It was very tedious job even that, you know. And of course I used to relieve and I used to go on to the outgoing incoming lines, you know, I could sending out messa
ges and of course we used to have all the officers come round and want you to phone their people and, you know, they asked you questions about their people and how they were and all the rest of it. We had quite a lot to do there.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember what you were paid?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't think I can remember that one. Not such a lot I know. I don't remember what -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you get on with the other people there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, jolly lot of girls. One particularly one she came from North side Paddington. Her
 hus - her father was something to do on the Borough Council and - she was very nice girl and - of course they used to have about five or six of them in the hall, you know, and they used to call them like the receiving people, you know, receptionists now 
they call them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about the people you worked for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Very strict. Matron there was very strict. Name was Steele.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did she treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Very strict indeed. Very strict. The Colonel was the head of the hospital - they had a Colonel and then the Matron. Sisters and that.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I don't suppose you saw much of him though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, he used to come around occasionally, yes. I remember King George V came to the hospital, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about the Matron - did you feel she was unfair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I suppose she had her job to do and she was doing it in the right manner, you know, keeping everybody in order.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you feel about this sort of work? Did you like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, I did, very much, yes, yes. I knew I was - thought I was doing a good turn - a good job, you know, in life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well I suppose it'd be about - when did my husband come out of the Army - I had to come when he came home you know, and I set up home again yo
u see. I went in while he was away and I think he was away about four years. I - I must have been away in that time you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 After the war it was when he came home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, well he went in 1914 and he must have come out in 1918. Yes. Then I set up home you see, I lived in Havelock }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Gardens}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 , up Kensal Rise. Had a flat up there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you have preferred another type of occupation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I enjoyed it very much. I like hospital work - I like, you know, the way the hospital's run and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you sever an apprenticeship or training period for any of these jobs? I suppose you were for the sewing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You was there, yes. Yes. Not the others. No. No, you went straight into the job. And - well it - they explained to you about it, you kno
w, what you had to do when you got there but you had to pick it up yourself and it was - well - you know, sometimes very complicated really I mean -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go out to work again after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. No. My husband didn't believe in that you know
, he said you ought to be at home and then I had - I had a little girl then I had a little boy. I wish I'd got the little girl now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any trade union or professional organisation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you feel that employers and workers had the same interest?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well I - I found that everybody's had an interest in me when I've been on my jobs. You know, they - they were very kind indeed to me. I mean I had no - no faults to find with them. I suppose people find more faults today than they would in those days.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you feel that workers and employers were all striving for the same thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Worked together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or did you feel their interests were different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, it - they seemed to - well, they seemed to strive for the 
one thing, you know, to be - happy and contented you know, but there wasn't the discontent there is today. Not by a long way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Some people say that in those days there was a great division between trained craftsmen and other workers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Ah, they're 
the sort of people that was - like my husband - because, you see, no, my husband you see, that was in his work, he was a - he was - engineer, you know, and he served and apprentice and - he only got about a half a crown a week but of course he - when he -
 he - it was beneficial to him after years, you know, training and that but I do think they had a little grievance of when they brought in people that didn't - you know, wasn't experienced. And - they picked the trade up, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 They felt it wasn't in their interests as craftsmen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Interest. Yes. Yes, yes. Yes. Well, I mean it wasn't fair really when you'd served an apprenticeship seven years, that's what my husband served on the railway but - at Swindon factory, you know, he was down at Swindon
. And then he came up to London. He was at the Old Oak and then from Old Oak he went to Paddington.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you say full time work changed your general attitude to life in any way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, you sort of felt more independent, wouldn't you, you sort of feel - got that sort of independent feeling.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you continue to live at home when you left school and started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did starting work change your relationship with your parents at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or with your brothers and sisters?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No, I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you spend Sundays differently?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. We always took Sunday as the day of rest always.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Just the same as before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh didn't go to Sunday school then, went to church in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not really. Not - not to that extent I don't think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you continue to spend your spare time in the same way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I think I've thought more of politics since I've been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  than I did before I was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you started work did you spend your spare time in the same way as when you were at school or did you do different things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I think we used to go
 out when we could get, you know, when we had sufficient money to go, you see, we'd have to save up to go out, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What would you do when you went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I mean to say if there was anything on like any fete or fair or anything, you kno
w, you'd got the money that you could go to it you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to the theatre much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I wasn't really keen on the theatre - my eldest sister was the theatre goer but I really didn't like it but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You went to your musical things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, yes. I went to Queens Hall - I used to go there very often on a Saturday. But - I like open air - everything out in the open air - cricket and all that sort of thing - I used to like that. Go and watch the game, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you make any new friends, boys or girls, when you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, only had my husband and that was right at an early age and I went through - what did we do - fifty-three years together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you bring friends home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 These were the same friends you had before you started work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You were living and working in the same district you'd gone to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, same district, yes. And of course you get to know more like that, more people around.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your have any special friends at this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, I had - my sister-in-law as a matter of fact, she was my biggest friend and she }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 
Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  my husbands brother.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You met them together did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You and your girlfriend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where would you go when you first met?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
We used to for walks, you know, and into the country and all over, you know, out - used to go up the Rise - Grinsel Rise and go for walks all round Willesden, Bromley.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The country was very close then wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Well of course it was very different to what it is today I mean it's all buildings now isn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents meet your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Once you were working did they expect to know where you were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, always wanted to know where you were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have to be home by a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Ten o'clock and no later.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Even when you were working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How old were you when you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Twenty-three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long had you known your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh -
 when - I went on a outing - a church outing and he threw a ball at my ear and - he kept coming apologizing, apologising and I thought he was never going to leave off apologizing and - in the end that's what it led up to.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was a good excuse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Keep friends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long did you know him before you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well I knew him when I was about fourteen or fifteen I think but we first went out for outing together on the church you know and we used to go to Ruislip and Rickmansworth and all sorts of places and have our tea and our, you know, used to cycle.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you knew him about six or seven years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where did he come from - from this district.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Didcot - Didcot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But he was living round here when you met him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. In Kilrabot Street. Yes, opposite Mrs Beck.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you save up money before getting }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes. Oh yes, we had to have a - bottom drawer and a bottom stocking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your parents help you in setting up a home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they all helped - the family helped, you know, to give you presents and different things to make your home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you engaged?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How long for - do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 About three years I think I was engaged for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Could you describe the wedding? Did you wear white?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, I had a costume - grey - no, blue - blue costume and a grey hat and grey accessories. Blue - because I felt that it would do, you know, more }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 practicable}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  afterwards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have bridesmaids?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. I never had any bridesmaids.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Who came to the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 All my friends and relations.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Have you any idea how many there would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Quite a few. You come to have a family of six and have all - each one got one that was twelve and - there would be othe
rs - friends around - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you say about fifty or so?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, thirty or fifty - thirty or forty - thirty or forty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you get wedding presents in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes. Everybody seemed to, you know, mince up something or the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go away on a honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, I went to, well as a matter of fact, my husband had to get back to Calais and we went to stay with my - sister-in-law down at Langley in Buckinghamshire. And he had to get back in a week you see, and he was given a weeks leave to get }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  and then he had to get back. Yes. And then when he left the Army I came and set up home you see, got the home ready.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So for the first year he was away and you were working as a V.A.D. and living at home still?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, yes. No, I was living with my - my mother and father were dead and I was living with my - middle sister, I had a middle sister - the one that died, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And she was }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your husband didn't come home at all during this year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was he abroad all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Four years. He had leave, you know, to come to get }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 After you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 did he get any more leave?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, he came out of the Army you see after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And then you went to live in this fault?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. Herbert Gardens. We was there three years and then we moved to Nine-Six Avenue and we was there for thirty years - or forty years - thirty years I think, thirty years and then we've been here since 1941 - what's that now - we've been here since 1941.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you didn't have a home up until the end of 1918 did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How old was your husband when you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He's three years older than me so he would be - twenty-five wouldn't he. I was twenty-three and he was twenty-five.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He was a soldier when you }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. But he was an engineer on the Great Western Railway for fifty-eight years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And he'd done that since he left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. He was apprenticed to the engineering, you know, at Swindon factory, yes, and he stayed with them fifty-eight years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That was the only job he ever had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was he a locomotive engineer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well he had lifts and cranes and all sorts. I was just saying the other day the dustmen
 are creating of being out in the wet - my husband used to get right out on the end of the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 jibs}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 to put them right, you know, with just a little mackintosh round him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He looked after the machinery?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes. Lifts and cranes and - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He didn't look after the engines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
And - any pipes burst - I remember one night he - he came home about ten o'clock - well, he'd done extra time - he should have been home at five and I had his dinner waiting for him but he didn't come home and - at ten o'
clock he was called out again and he had to go to Smithfield and he didn't come home 'til five in the morning. You know, they used to have a burst pipe or something like that under the market and that and that had to be done to get the things going.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 This was belonging to the railway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 The railway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He was like a station engineer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Maintenance - maintenance engineer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He wouldn't have any casual or part time jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh no. No. He had enough to do to get on with his work. He worked jolly hard I can tell you.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did your husband feel about you working when you were a V.A.D.?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh he didn't mind. No. It all helped to make a home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But once you'd got the home he didn't want you to go out to work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, he didn't want me to go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 That was the only job he ever had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. Yes, he didn't do bad did he - fifty-eight years. And he was never late. No, never late - never. I mean, he was like that at school you know, had all the medals for punctuality and - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did your husband feel about his work - did he like it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh, he loved it. Oh he was - yes, he - I think his life and soul was in the railway. I don't know if the railway's life and soul was in him but - I know he was - he was - he knew every engi
ne - I've got a book here I got out - now look at this, this is what I racked out yesterday, this is how he used to sit and put out all the different trains and that - engines. Look at it - I found that yesterday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 None of your children were born before 1918 were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Gordon was born in '27 was it and - five years before that I had one - now what would that be - yes, '22. I had a girl - '22, she'd been older than Gordon.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you manage housekeeping in the years before 1919 - you didn't r
eally have any did you because it was 1918 you first set up house wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You just had the one year didn't you really 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well of course we never had any holidays, you know, we didn't get paid any holidays we had to, you know, sa
ve for holidays and - the - well, the money then wasn't very much was it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you know in those days what husbands earned or was it kept secret?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, we never had any secrets between ourselves, whatever we told.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Had you any idea when you first got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  what he earned?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes. He always -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he give you the pay packet or did he give you a certain amount?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, and I had to do everything, you know, and think everything out myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would he give you all of his pay packet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes, barring - he has his pocket money back again - he had his pocket money. Work it all out myself, you know, and I did have to manage it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you talk it over?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I used to say to him if I couldn't just manage we 
had to talk it over say to him well it's getting a bit rough now what shall we do - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Have you any idea how much it was when you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, of course the engineers they got good money in those days really for what - comparison 
of some of them - I think about three fifteen - something like that. Three - three fifteen.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So it wouldn't be too bad compared with general wages?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not for the time - not for the times. And of course it was like we had to pay big rents then 
I believe - about fifteen shillings or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How many rooms did you have in this flat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 One - three. There was the front room, the bedroom and the kitchen. There was a bathroom downstairs we could have gone if we'd wanted to.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were there any relatives or lodgers living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No. It was a Mr Mulley the picture frame people up the Kensal Rise owned the house and they lived downstairs and they - two girls had a room upstairs on the - same landing as we were.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You didn't have any help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you do the washing at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Now you've got me there I - no, I believe I did my washing at home. 'Cos I believe I had to have a certain day, you know, for going down and - to do the washing. Yes, I
 believe I did there. Because I didn't send it out to Ridgways 'til later on in life, you know, up here - when I've been living here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were any of your clothes made or mended by you or your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh we was always trying to connive to save, you know, all the time, I'd try - I'd try mend and do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you make any of your own clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I didn't make any clothes - my underclothes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your husband repair your shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not very often - no. Not very often - he didn't do the shoe
s. Not like my father did - my father did. But he didn't anything - I used to have to send them to the menders and that used to be jolly dear I can tell you. They're about one of the biggest things of expense was the mending the shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever have to buy any secondhand clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, not as I - no, not as I know of. I used to have to wait 'til I could afford it. Then I used to wait.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where would you buy your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I liked Barkers and Pontins and - there's the shops -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How often would you buy clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And I liked Lilley and Skinners for shoes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How often would you buy clothes for yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, when I was wanting them, you know, but I mean we had to make do we didn't have them -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You didn't have the specially for Easter or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. We had to make do most of the time.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember how often you got shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh about twice a year I suppose.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your husband help at all in the house with jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Like cleaning, cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Always - we helped one another - we always helped one another and that's how we lived through life.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Things like lighting the fires, decorating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Well, he wasn't very fond of painting and that - I was the painter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But he would help you with the washing up and the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Yes, we worked together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Improvements - repairs to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, we did try to, you know, do what we could to keep it all going nicely.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 In the flat did you have meals in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Kitchen - yes. It was very pleasant room - very pleasant room - nice front room - big front room we had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever eat in the front room on special occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes, we'd have parties, we'd have a little, you know, friends in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You cooked in this kitchen as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What kind of cooking equipment did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Gas cooker - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What time did you have breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well all times really. Of course it all depends what time my husband had to be at work. Seven o'clock I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You'd have it together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. I was always up early in the morning, that's why I am now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember what you would have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, of course we had - wh
en the war was on we had the rationing you know - so two, you know, two ounces of this and two ounces of the other. I just can't remember - but we had to try and do what we could, you know, to make a meal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have anything different on certain days, like Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh well we usually had sausages on Sundays for breakfast - always on - used, you know, have sausages on Sunday morning. And - of course we always had a good dinner on a Sunday. They always looked to have a - a roast and - you know, 
batter pudding and that. Now my son doesn't agree with that, you know, he likes it different, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When did you usually have your mid-day meal? Did your husband come home for this
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 One o'clock. Mostly one o'clock.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He usually came home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
My husband? Not always, no, of course he sometimes had to go away - right away to, you know, all over London. And he used to go down Newbury and all down there Appleford - was it Appleford - because they used to stretch all out there - the - the Gre
at Western like for the jobs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he usually have a big evening meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh when he - my husband came home he always had an evening meal. I've said more than enough about that - having to keep it warm sometimes when he didn't come to time, you know, and you have to keep it hot all the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you'd have no regular time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, no, never could rely on what time he'd be back, you know, and when he came back you never knew how long he's going to stay there cos he gets called out, you know. Marvellous like I - I don't know, people wouldn't do it today what he done. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember what sort of things you had for your main meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, all sorts of things, I mean to say - fish and - meat, chops, you know, anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 was it quite easy to get things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, we had the war first part, you know, first part of it - 1914 was when the war started and of course we was rationed and that but - I mean to say I always used to manage to get like what wasn't ra
tioned, like fish and that sort of thing that wasn't rationed - they weren't rationed. Meat was rationed - we couldn't have such a lot of meat. As a matter of fact I think two days a week we had a meatless day, you know. We'd have a pudding then - we had 
one then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you make your own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh I used to make jam - I used to love plum jam. Yes, yes. You don't see much of that now do you - plum jam, it's usually apricot or, you know, strawberry and blackcurrant or something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you make any wine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh - I'll tell you what we did used to make in - during the war - bee wine - whatever that was made with - raisins and different things. I forget actually how you make it but I know you had to stand it for 
a day or two and it used to go bubbling up and down, you know, these raisin things - it was called bee wine. That was during the war and we made some of that - I remember that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever make beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever make your own medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you bottle fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, yes, yes I have bottle fruit before. I've broke some bottles too. Pouring it on and putting it in the oven too hot.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you manage to grow any vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we 
tried to - beans and that sort of thing and potatoes, you know, at Beverley Gardens, we got bombed out you see from here and we went out to Harrow in Beverley Gardens for about a twelve month and then the gentleman wanted to come back, you know, after the
 war. He - you know, we stuck it during the war and he wanted to come back in his house - he went down to Wales or somewhere.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember buying tinned or dried vegetables or fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. Well I really didn't like tinned stuff really, I suppose
 I eat more now than ever I did then. I didn't used to care much about tinned stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You didn't keep any livestock?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. No. No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You thought there were about two meatless days didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 About how many times a week did you get meat in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 There was just about two - two without - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And most of the other days you would have meat unless you had fish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, that's right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever manage to get any extra meat from poaching?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Like rabbit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No. No. I would have liked a few.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Tin meat? No. Well, I don't know - I suppose we could have done but I - I tell you, I'm not very fond of tinned stuff. I'd rather, you know, fish round
 to see what I can get like in the way of fish and that sort of thing. A thing we were very fond of was soused herrings and soused mackerel, you know, that was what I used to like, used to souse them and have them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Used to do them yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes,
 yes. The bay leaf and vinegar and you know. But we used to like that more for a meal than we would have done out of a tin, you know, those days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember yourself going short so your husband could have more to eat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh he wouldn't like to
 see me go short he'd say now go on you have what I've got and, you know, he wouldn't - he wouldn't like to be, you know, like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember anything you did with your husband on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, most times we went to his mother's, 
you know, we always spent with his mother we used to go there at Christmas and we had - they had quite a big family there and they used to have a - I know a gentleman used to come there every Christmas and when the last of the Christmas feast was gone he 
u
sed to go. You'd have a big ham, you know, had that and all sorts. Oh yes, and we used to enjoy our Christmases there you know, it was a jolly Christmas - yes. And all - of course a lot of those people are gone now I mean passed on - the different ones we
 used to have come there - Gus Livens and people like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you or your husband have any musical instruments in the flat?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I had a piano, yes, we had the piano and my husband used to play the piano and without his fingers too - he played that
 piano. He vamped with that hand you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you used to sing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 I used to - yes, I used to do the singing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you and your husband used to make music together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, we used to - we used to sit and sing the hymns, you know, on Sunday together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any books or newspapers or magazines in the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we always had a newspaper, 'course a bit cheaper than what they are today. And the Indicator a ha'penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any books?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, railway books, I s
hould think we had railway books galore I should think. My husband was always the railway book - railway magazines and - some monthly and a weekly and every other thing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where did you get books from - did you buy the newspapers and magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. From the stationery - yes, from the stationery.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to a library?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, my husband went to the library always, you know, he used to like the library. He used to go down there from here every day - ever since we've been }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  - always liked to look in the library. To see the latest, you know, things that happened on the railway - he's still with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you read aloud to each other at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well we often used to read bits out of the paper to one another, you know, what we could see was any interest at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Can you remember what you did on Bank Holidays when you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, we used to go out for the day somewhere or other, you know, used to - oh, where our favourite place was - Lords, you know, to see t
he cricket, you know, we'd sit there for a day and used to thoroughly enjoy it, you know. And of course as I say you both want to be interested in that sort of thing to enjoy a thing. You see, I like sport and I - I used to love cricket. Yes, and I love t
he open air, you know. Don't get so much of it now, but still, I've had me chances.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever go away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well not such a lot, no. We never, you see, dad was one for his work and work it was, you know, I mean to say you had to abide
 by it but as I say we've had our days out and enjoyed ourselves. We have no regrets in any of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you spend Sundays - Saturdays in those days when you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well Saturday we used to go out and - sometimes we used to go t
o a football match or something like that, you know, when it was nice out to Chelsea, you know. And, that used to be a nice outing, you know, to go to Chelsea, that's quite a good way to go, you know, from where we were and that would give us a little bit
 of pleasure. But that wasn't always pretty often, you know, now and again. And on Sundays we used to go to St Judes Church which is not there at the moment - that got taken down - that was the end of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go for a walk or anything on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. We used to go for walks - over Hampstead, Hampstead Heat and round and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you think it wrong to work or enjoy your self on Sunday or didn't you think it mattered?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, we kept Sunday as Sunday, you know, we used to think it was good to do things quietly on a Sunday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You went to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Then did quiet things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, that's right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 This was Church of England you went to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes. That was the church we started at both of us, you know, when we was little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was through this church that you met really wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How often would you go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Every Sunday evening we used to go dad and I and we sometimes got the boy - you know, the boy and his wife to go, 
you know, several times they've been with us at St }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 Jude\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
. Of course as I say it got pulled down and that stopped all that, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 you went every Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, always went to church, yes. You see, we - in those days
 they were brought up to go to Sunday school and - you know, looked to that sort of thing but now they don't. They don't think nothing of it do they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And you went together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to the choir?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. I did, yes. And my husband's brother he funnily enough, you know, the flats }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid1317777\charrsid9327351 that\rquote s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351  going up - he went to St John's church in the St John's Wood Road, you know, he was in the choir there quite a few years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did the church run any temperance clubs do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Monday - Monday evening I think there was a temperance -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you a member of that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't think we did - we did join that - no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any other clubs organised by the church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we used to go occasionally to - you know, different meetings and that sort of thing, you know, together we used to go down and see -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But no regular club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you say grace at meals?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes. Well, did sometimes not always but we did sometimes, I suppose when we was - got into trouble if we didn't say.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you say prayers together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, we said our prayers on our own. Yes, we both -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 After you were }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 did you take an interest in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, my husband always took an interest in politics but I - I didn't bother such a lot you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What were your views then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, different to my husband's unfortunately. And - that's why I never voted because I - you know, I didn't like to vote against him because I thought to myself well
 he's the head of the house and he must know best and - but anyway but I think about a year ago I took - plucked up courage and I voted for what I wanted to vote for.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your husband was Labour wasn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Liberal, yes. No, he was Labour and I was Liberal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember how you came to be a Liberal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, because I could see things what Labour did was very good in thought but not in theory, you know, I mean to say they did - thought these things would turn out but I could see they wouldn
't do, you know, could see they wouldn't come to anything. I mean, there's a thing today that I'm afraid they'll have to alter and its giving away all this money to people to lay idle and I think that's one of the worst things they've done. I can see thin
gs in, you know, what they do is not the right thing to do. I mean, they're giving it to the youngsters today just to lay at home and that doesn't do, you want to give it to them to go to work don't you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You felt the Liberals had a better idea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Y
es, better ideas of those sort of things, you know. Well I mean to say, through life you see, I mean, I've sorted, or tried to sort it out, I don't say I've sorted everything out but they - they laugh at me some of the girls because I look ahead too much 
b
ut I think it does good to look ahead and think things out as to which way you're going or try to look which way you're going. But I think that that's how it is, you know, through, you know, running a home you've got to you know, sort things out and think
 about them before you act, you know, before you act.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you or your husband vote in a general election before 1919?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, we did when we - they started to vote I think we started to vote.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you vote in 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, sometimes I didn't always go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Your husband would vote Labour and you didn't vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, well, I didn't vote against him you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you think your husband ever felt under any pressure form anybody to vote for a political party - for example did he feel his emp
loyer put pressure on him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. No, I don't think so, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Were you a member of a political party then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or your husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I think he was - yes, I believe he was. And you see he wouldn't say too much to me because I didn't like his views you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your husband ever work for a political party at an election?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I don't think so.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You didn't help the party at elections?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did he take part in any political activity other than at election times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, I don't think so really. He used to go to a meeting some times once a month I don't know what that was on about - it was the Labour - something to do with the Labour party I should think, you know, but I never asked him anything about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you and your husband were not doing your work how did you spend your time? Did you go out together in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not very often, no. We always used to find things to do in the home, you know, there used to be different things to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you remember ever going out for an outing in the evenings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, no, we never used to go much - only in the summertime, you know, when we used to get out for walks and that sort of thing but not to go anywhere much. Of course as I say his work kept him very busy and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And he had no regular time of finishing work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Well, he had a time but of course he was on call, you see, and they used to call him out at different times if there was a burst or anything like that he had to go and see to it as part of his job really.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would he spend many evenings at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Always at home, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If he wasn't working he was always at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, he was always at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did either of you go to any clubs or institutes or pubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Do you mean like the Prudential or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Any Christmas clubs or for holidays or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I always used to save it, you know, for those things, save it, no, I 
saved it myself, I thought, you know, put it away and then when I wanted it I drew it out, you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you belong to any sick clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or funeral clubs or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did either of you take part in any sport?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Oh I did - I carried on with my tennis for a bit but - I gave it up, you know, when I had my children to look after - my boy - I had a girl first and lost her and then had the boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your husband play football or go fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Or cycling?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. He gave that up, you know, when we got }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 .
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever bet in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, no, probably the Derby we might do but that was about all. Yes, that was all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever go to any theatres?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And then my husband wasn't one for any of that. No, it would be me not him. He didn't really do any of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to any theatres or concerts or music halls or the cinemas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. Well, the music hall we went to sometimes, you know, went to the Edgware Road music hall once or twice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you go to the cinema?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not very much, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any hobbies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well this trains, you know, his great hobbies - trains and - he used to - well, make different things with trains and that,
 you know, little models and that sort of thing. He was always trains with him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh we had cats - yes. He liked cats - but I don't like cats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you collect anything - your husband collected information about trains?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, all trains, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you collect anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, I used to like pressing leaves and all that sort of thing 'cos I'm very fond of flowers - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You wouldn't have a garden at the flat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. Didn't have a garden - had me window box though. I had the little, you know, bow window and I had boxes round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have any interests outside the home do you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Not really 'cos I had enough to do when it was in there - I had plenty to do, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did anyone outside the home help you when you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, had to do it myself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If you were confined to bed how did you manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, I did burst a blood vessel once but - I think my eldest sister used to come round and my other sister and - my
 husband used to, you know, do the necessary things.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So between you, your sisters would come and help and you'd manage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did either of you have any relatives living nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh yes, yes, yes. We had relatives around, yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How much did you see of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
There was - well then they moved away, you know, my - mother-in-law, she went over to Greenford, you know, 'cos she was in Kilrabot Street and then she went 'course that made it that we didn't have her so often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 about how often would you see your relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well my husband used to go every Sunday morning with my - my - son, you know, when he was little.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 When you were first }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid14104528 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
 did you still see your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, my mother died in 1914.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 You saw your sisters though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have friends then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh we had quite a lot of friends, you know, in being the church, you know, you get to know people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Where would you meet them usually?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, they used to come to see us very often of an evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you share the same friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did your husband have friends of his own, and did you have friends of your own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, I mean - we made friends between us like - together, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever invite friends into the home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well they used to come - was - Mr Smith he used to come every week, Mr Falkaman used to come - his stay every week, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you give them something to eat and drink when they came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes. Yes, in the evening.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you invite your friends in on particular days and occasions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you say you shared your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did friends call in casually without an invitation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh sometimes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well not since I've been here but I did have neighbours before, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you ever go out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, we didn't go out all that amount, you know, sometimes we'd go over to my sister-in-law's, you know, to Greenford.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 People often tell us in those days they made their own amusements - what did you do when you got together with friends and neighbours?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Oh, used to play cards something like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Would you ever make music together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
No, not really, no. The only thing was the piano and singing, you know, might do that, you know, might have a little sing-song round the piano and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Was your home rented - the flat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you see anything of your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well he lived with - the first one in Herbert Gardens I lived with my landlord.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 It was his house you had the flat in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Yes, that's how it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 How did you feel about him as a landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Very good, yes, they were quite decent people, yes. He used to be up - the picture frame people up Kensal Rise, you know, he owned the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Did you have a struggle to make ends meet at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, on and off, you kno
w, sometimes you know, you'd find that - bit stiff-going, you know, if you had - things went up and your money wasn't the money that it is today.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What did you think about that - did you get fed up sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, you did really get a little bit
 despondent but then as I say if you have a good man and, you know, he can see the same way as you can you get out of it, don't you, you sort of manage somehow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 What difference did it make if your husband was ill or out of work - I think you said before he was never out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 Well, only when he had his accident - he was off three months and then - my son, he put his arm out at the same time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 So you never had help from the Guardians?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. I had to keep myself all that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 If your husband had been ill he wouldn't have been paid on the railway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No. No, no, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 But he was never ill in that period up 'til 1918?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no, no. He's a marvellous man altogether. But still they had to be marvellous in those days -
 either that or go without. But today they get all the things laid on don't they.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And he was never late for work at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 No, no. Ooh, he'd be there miles before his time. And walk there sometimes if the buses weren't running or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 And he had this certificate for safety?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 
Yes. Yes. Yes, it was in '16 and then he had - it was '36 wasn't it - yes, '36 he had his accident - that was sixty wasn't it. Only I thought it was so strange that he should get that - have an accident afterward
s yes. But I mean it wasn't his fault, I'm quite sure of that, you see, when you test a thing and I can quite see what he meant, if you test anything you've got to test it freely and I suppose somebody got in the lift, you know, they'd taken the thing and
 
just was going to test it - somebody got in the lift and he was up testing the wire round there rope and wire caught his fingers and off they went. And he wrapped them round and run right across the yard to a - to a whatsname and - oh, I think he must hav
e
 gone through it. He went in St Thomas's and I can always remember going with my eldest sister to see him. But - the part I - I - I do think the railway after all you've done and all those years that they might have done something or the other, I mean, yo
u know, a big concern like that and to think they get away with it all it is really - I can't see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7014491 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He never got compensation for this?
\par }\pard\plain \ltrpar\s15\qj \fi-461\li461\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin461\itap0\pararsid7014491 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid1008777 GB  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10888220\charrsid9327351 He got at the end but he never asked for any compensation 'til he left there - they told him that he would get
 partial compensation - he didn't know what partial compensation meant I don't suppose then and it was a hundred and fifty they gave him that's it, I mean people have had thousands with losing less than that, you know, but he would never, you know, he was
 a man like that, he would stand on his dignity and principles, you know.
\par }}