{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid4456934\rsid5586003\rsid6424897\rsid9263038\rsid9461452\rsid9583482\rsid9984110\rsid10644405\rsid11414884\rsid12147710\rsid13568274}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info
{\title Information about interviewee}{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min10}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords32411}{\nofchars184744}{\nofcharsws216722}
{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot4456934 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9461452 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid9461452 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid9461452 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13568274 1894}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13568274 F}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13568274 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13568274 Housework}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid13568274 Dumfries}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid9461452\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid9461452 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your name's Mrs. Sharp,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Can you tell me when you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 September 13th - 1894. 1894.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where were you born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Glaister's Cottage, Kirkgunzeon. Glaister's Cottage, Kirkgunzeion, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You told me that's not the house that your mother lived in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, it was - we were living in Drumnail then, Drumnail Kilgunzeon,
 you see, Glaister's Cottage, he - he was the shep - was the farmers - Glaister's was the famer's house, and - and my father was the shepherd, and - and the sheperd's house was Drumnail you see; Drumnail Kirkgunzeon. I think that's all changed now of cour
se.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother only went to Glaister's cottage for you being born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes. Yes, we were up there - up there for - 'til she was all right with her - her - a Mrs. - Bowes - Boyes, Boyes or something they called her, a lady - she just stayed - for the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was this usual for people to go away to have a baby like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well, I think in - in the old times it was - there werenae any maternity hospitals in Dumfries you see, there were no word of the - had the hospitals in Dumfries then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother didn't have any relations round about that could come and help her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No, she - there was the - there's the sun coming out - there were - mother brought up two boys - her - her sister's and my father's - belonged to a sister of my father'
s you see. Well, they - they were left - they were left for to - help a wee bit in the house, while my father was out at the hills you see. Big heather hills they were. The hea - heather - in the hills.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did he have a lot of sheep to look after?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Had a lot of sheep to look after. Aye. And then - and then of course the - there in Drumnail - we could have - you had plenty out houses, and you kept pigs, and hens and - and - all like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 For your own use?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, that was right - use, you had quite a good comfortable living. There.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did your father come from originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Kirkmahoe. Kirkmahoe I think he - he was - he - the Swan's was born, there, I think he be born at Kirkmahoe I'm sure you see, but he lived - he lived at - at T
inwald too, near Tinwald you know like the - at the side of Tinwald - where - where his - his father and mother was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was he a shepherd all the time, did he start off when he was a youngster being a shepherd?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. I think in his young days he was 
a groom, with - with the - with the - with the McCloughs you know the - the - aye - the - they - there - and there was a brother and him, you know - were together and that was the days of the coachmen, you know, they - they had liveries you see to put on,
 and they had to drive out the young Lords and tend to their horses and - and - and all that, that was the old old Buccleuchs. Where used - he used to tell us all about them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He'd tell you stories about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ah. Aye. We used - we used to like to hear him telling us about his young days. When he was out driving.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Great big coaches were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes. The - so he - he used to speak - and it was round about - a lot a - and he used to drive - he went for big long drives with them out too you know
, the - the coachman and - and one was the coachman, one was the footman you see, but they were in liveries - to the - he used to drive round about the - you know, the districts they had. Aye. The districts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And then he went to be a shepherd after that did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well - when - I think when he - when he married like - when - he - he - when he should - he would be a shepherd, he would start sheep - he - he - he was a young shepherd like for - to start with like you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Like an apprentice?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, like an - apprentice, he would - he'd be like what you calls a - a - a single - then be like a - a married shepherd and then he would be like a single shepherd, and - and af - and after that he - he got married himself you see. And then he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He would be looking for a job with a house then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes. He got a - he got a house you see then, and - in a - in a - I think it was - I think it was Berwick - Berwick I think the - the name of the - the gentleman - that - that - that got him the - this job
 you see, the name of the shepherd and - and - and mother - and my mother - was - my mother was a laundry - laundress here, in - in the big house you see, my mother like, she - and - and he was - a young - he was young shepherd you see - at this - at this
 farm, and I think Berwick was the name of his - mas - master you see. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So that's how they met?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
How they met you see and then they got married, and - and - it was - he was quite - they were - quite near to each other like, I mean to say they \endash 
 Mr. Berwick and the - the - the man - the Burn of Thornhill I think he was in the end, the - oh they were well to do gentlemen then you know the Berwicks. And Mrs. Berwick, and she had two daughters. She had two daughters too, and - and when we were - we
 used to get away - they used to come for us and take us away over and - and - for the day to play with daughters you know, Rosie and Jessie. Ro - Rosie and Jessie was the name of the daughters. And - and - and it was fun. And - and they enjoyed it, they 
enjoyed it you see, 'cos they had - we - we played about with them and - and I can remember the - them putting us on swings you know, giving us swings you see outside and that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You got on quite well with the girls there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, we got on fine with
 them. And - and you got lots of - of good clothes from them too you know, when they - when they grew out of their clothes - we come in for them. Very good, very kind. They were often good to mother and that - mother was a long time with - with them, and 
- she did a lot of the laundry work you know, the - the - doing up of the shirts and his collars and all like that for - so they - they - she did - was miss her terribly but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So she carried on working after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, she - aye, she -
 she - if she was near - if she was near she used to go - in to help them in the laundry you see. And she enjoyed it quite - well they were good to her. They were good to her, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did your mother come from originally?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ruthwell I think. I
 think - Ruthwell. I think it was down that - way, where - ay, yes, down that way, Ruthwell. Her mother lived a long time down there, at Ruthwell and that way. But the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 With her father too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, her father was a shepherd - too, but he died - he 
died - an early age, with - with poisoning, he - he got at the dipper, you know, when they were dipping the sheep. There was something - he had - something about it, he used to hurt his knee or something, and he - he - this - this poison stuff, he got -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It must have got into the wound?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Well it went through his system. Because he was - he died quite a - I think he - I think it did - it would be in his late fifties maybe when he was taken away, we used to hear mother speaking about him, becaus
e I never mind him, my grandfather like and that, and that grandfather, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You remember your grannies though do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, I'm called for her, I was called for her, aye. Alison Lockett. Alison Lockett you see Swan. Swan. Swan's my maiden name. S
o - I was - I was called for the - and - and - and often went to - went - when - when she was a widow - you see - she - she went - she went along to - there was a cousin - it was a cousin like of mother's at - Comlongan Castle, like - Comlongon Castle wit
h
 the - that would be the Johnson Douglas's place. They - this was the - the dairy part of this, this was the dairy part that he had, the big dairy part. It's where they - they used to get her over - and - and she got lots of milk back with her and all wit
h
 - when she was living alone, when she was living by herself. I'd often go to her. To stay. She was - she was - well she lived in the end, she lived to about nearly ninety, grandmother, my grandmother. And she was a - she was big strong looking woman, tal
l - and - she'd worked hard in her young days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your mother live to a good age too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, she was nearly eighty - nearly eighty when she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When did she die, can you remember?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She died - in - well she - she was staying with m
e when she died, she - she - see my husband was - one of the policemen you see, and then you had the police houses at Marchmount, we - we'd one of the police houses there, and - and - she - she flitted there with us you see because I was looking after her
 
before that you see. And - and she - so she died there with us and it was 1940. 1940 was the year anyway, and - I can't now just quite remember whether it was - whether it was - March - March or anything. But I know that it - it - it was a big funeral she
 had.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were saying your father didn't have very good health?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, and I - he had - he was - he was a shepherd and had to move around - you see, you see, after we got out - out of Kirkgunzeon - and out - out around that way - he - he took a - a
 - a place - like it was - at - Crochmore, you see, Crochmore, he really - flitted out to Crochmore - and - the - he - he had - he'd quite a good - he - he'd quite a way of doing but he thought there were too many voices, you know there were - there was l
i
ke two different masters you know, and - and - it was difficult, so they - it was - and - and - Ferguson was the name of the - at - at the head one that had Crochmore then - then. It's a bachelor now I think isn't it, at Crochmore? But I think it is, but 
however, we - we went - we went to Shawhead school for a year, my sister and I. And the boys. The boys see too 'til they grew up you see, to - to -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The boys were both older than you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, they - they - the ones that mother brought up from a - aye
, they were older, but - when they - when they went away - when - when they - I left the school, they - they sort of worked about - one was - were only about a year, managed a year at Crochmore because it was - nearer - my father had rheumatic fever and -
 and wasna very much good after that for a while you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did that affect his heart?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It suddenly - it must have kind of weakened him or something, but - however - he would - he got the - applied for this - what it was called, Lochur, Noniaive, Lo
chur, a big farm it was, a big farm, but - but - it was - he was - it was a good place to be in too you see - and he got - got helps with - with his shepherding, he had - he got one -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He didn't have all the work to do himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 A young shepherd t
o help him and - and - both in the lambing season, and - and in - and the - you know - had lots of things you did - they - that he could do you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He'd be busy when they clipping as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, clipping, aye, clipping up and all afterwards - ca
tch up all the handlings and all that, running about and he used to come - and - and - it was like a - a - he finished up with a - like a spree, as you called them, entertainments. Because you had a lot of shepherds you know gathered, and then there was -
 some of them players, with a violin and some of them singers and - suchlike as that and then they - they danced.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 After the work was done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, on a flag floor. On a flag - yes, just flag floors and that. Enjoyed our - this was after the - the c
lipping was done you see. And - and they - they had a good - they had a good - meal that night too, and - they quite enjoyed sitting round about. Of course we were just - my sister and I see were just - had our hair, you know long and hanging down our sho
u
lders, you know, the - then, you know, and - and - and you - enjoyed watching them you see, and that. Oh it was good. It was good. We enjoyed it. And then - you see, the - there was like - you had like - two - there were two masters too at that really - C
a
lender - Stubbs and Callender, was the name of them you see for the first lot you see, and they had their - their - their - friends - came it was a good big house you see, and they - they came - they came - to stay - with them for a - for a bit. And - and
 - well - mother - mother helped them as much as she could too you see doing things.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 In the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Because she was a good baker and - and that, but there were - the - they brought - they brought - some of their - sometimes they brought the -
 their - their own - their own needs and that you see, sometimes. Well they - they were there - for like the first half of the - year, and then - your next - the shooting was like after that - to - have company - for - for - in - from - company - they wer
e
 at - really - gentry you know I mean to say - they just like took the shooting, for the shooting season, and they had their friends - Hep Hepburn was the name of the - the gentleman, and - and - and - he brought his - brought his staff with him, had his 
- still with him, aye, staff with him. You see, they - they - we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they have lots of parties there of visitors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 We - that way - for the shooting season, and - and any - the - the - they had - friends from - Pitlochry too, who - they - the Hig
gins, Higgins' - I think it was Higgins they called the - the - from Pitlochry. And - and - or - they were awful kind to - they were honestly awful kind to mother and liked them. And my father had his - had - had his sheep and - and things to attend to, b
ut - but you had - we had plenty of outhouses too you see, and he - and then - and then of course - there was a lot of cattle. There was a lot of cattle too you see that mother saw to as well. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She helped with the cows did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And - a
nd - helped - aye, young - young - young cattle out there some of them - some of them was milking and anyway she did all the cows, their own cows - like - we'd always about two cows you see, so that you would - milk - milk the whole year round in that way
,
 and she kept two pigs. They were away - they were away from the - the sten, aw-a down I can mind - they were away down a good bit - for the sten you see. The sten - and - and - they'd two pigs and she - they - they - aye, they did well with the pigs - gr
eat big pigs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about killing the pigs, did your mother have to do with that too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye - there were - oh I - well, any time - you were - they kept the - the - the bladder and made - the - puddings, black puddings, and - and - and then white pu
ddings you know, the washing of the puddings she - was great - there was a spigot near where you could - where you could do that you see, plenty of water supply. So - it was - an then - in the - the - the - kept going with the - the bacon, with the bacon 
- some - some of them wanted the bacon you see, to take - take bits away with them you see, pieces of the pigs away with them, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They would smoke them at home would they or cure them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Cure them you see. They - they - were - like - mother like
 and father. Father did the curing, there were a - there were a big - outhouse - for - where they could lay them in the salt and - and cure them that way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't go short of food then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Never go short of food. It was a great place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother must have worked very hard though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh she worked hard - she worked - she had - she had a hard life you know, she - she - she'd a good - she'd a good way earning, and - and she said, she said she would - a rough way of life and good - good food
 and - and - and good ways and and then there were - there were good ways you see, and - buying of things as well and taking her out in that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The people from the big house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mm. They were - they were awful kind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When did they move to Tinwald then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh that was after - that was after - after we had been up Crawick Glen. He was - he left - he was about three year at Lochur - Lochur and he went to a wee - went to a wee school - at - it was - it was a wee school that my sister and I went to
, and - and you had to go - over a - just a pathway, just a pathway, it was - what - it was a good bit to go you see, and you had to go - keep on this pathway, for there was a lot of adders about you know, on the ground, there was a lot of adders, so I - 
we kept - mother kept us in boots you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't get to go with your bare feet in the summertime then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no, never run with our bare feet. Never went out with our bare feet, no. Just we had to. It was - always vexed when we left Lochur, '
cos my dad was find - finding hard to get away up - to - have three mile - three mile out of Sanquar it was, up Crawick Glen, Crawick Glen they called it, and way - oh it's a different Sanquhar nowadays I expect.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It's grown like everything else hasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Everything else. You see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How old would you be when you went up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I would be coming on for twelve I think. Ten - twelve. We went to Sanquar - I went to Sanquhar school - you see, it was Sanquhar school then it was - and then it 
was - it - it turned into a Sanquhar Academy now, yes, it is and - just on - on what you call Queensbury Square, near - near to the old - old church, used to be - the - the old church it was then. It was - it was a Mr. Woods that was the - great big stout
 minister that - was the minister then, but he - he used to come and see us up Crawick Glen you see, he got a - if he got a lift with one of the farmers, but - and - took him up and brought him back maybe, he was a big stout man, was a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Not very keen on walking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He was awful kind too. So kind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How long did your people stay at Crawick Glen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh were there - I - eleven years, the - they had - you see - they - they - they - this - and my father - gave up Lochur you see - it - it was gettin
g too much for him you see to - but he wanted a - a different kind of heather you see, when - he - a different kind there, a sheep and that you see - of - there was - sheevites in some parts and - and black faces in the other, they were rather different -
 
in some kinds of sheep. So - he'd no bother in getting - getting this place up Crawick Glen - Carco - Carco was the name of the farm, Carco, its - and - and - and - we got - his - his - shepherd's house - was where - was - was - just sitting across - and 
- and - and it was looking down onto the roadway, it was doing the - the road that - we were three mile off Sanquar of course.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had to walk that three miles to and from the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - aye - to the - school. We went to school. We - we'd com
pany you know with the - with the other - there - there was two shepherds on you see, there was young - one - house away further up the road, and - and they come down and went to the school - all go down the road together.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be all right in good weather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, and - when you turned - and my sister - my sister left the school - before me because she was - she wanted to - to pick up the dressmaking, the dressmaking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was she older then you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She was older, a year and nine month older
 than me. She died - she's - she - got married of course and she went away to Australia. See - see. So - so she died, I think her husband's still alive yet you see but it'll be - he'll be in hospital. Because he was a sort of invalid. Up - well three mile
 
off Sanquhar. To this - well - he - he was - the farmer was like newly married - and - he - see - so my father had - had to be the - head shepherd you see, oh the house was nae very good when - the - the house that he got to live in wasna a very good one.
 
And - and he come on now to my - the big house at Lochur, he - we took it badly you see, and - and of course he was - he wasnae pleased to - at getting a house in this state and - and he was - and he was disgusted so he turned it straight away. So - the -
 the \endash  Mr. Hunter says \endash 
 Mr. Hunter had got a good character about him for the - well, he says, don't leave us, he says, he says, don't leave us, he says, you see, I'm just new - I've just newly taken over this farm you see, the - the shepherd and - and tha
t, and - and - was depending - on an experienced, and - my father and that for the sheep - for - for the hills. Oh it was a good big hill, a good big travel but then he was a young man, a younger man then you see. And - so - see - see -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So he stayed eleven years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, he put his - his - he had - he was just getting it up, the first - before had put the first year in, he said, oh you could stay in a place like this, he says. OH, he says, I'll get all the work done for you, he says, I'll get it all
 repaired. And - and - both inside and outside you see. And - and a new door on. Like at the house. Aye. Had a good doing - it's a good while doing you see. However they made it very - respectable in every way and - and - my father just sort of - got - go
t on well, and he - and he was there for eleven years after that. Just seemed to work in - in - in - aye -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They must have hit it off with each other?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Got off - got on fine, they got on fine, he was a - he was a good master, he was a good - maste
r, Mr. Hunter. He - he - and - so it was always - he - my father he came to you see for anything. Aye, he had a - father had been a shepherd so long you see. So - and then it was hard - it was hard - the grocers - the - the grocers came up with their - wi
th their carts you know, the - had - so many days of the week and - and then you - had to get - the only thing was - when we was at - a Lochur we was used to beets you see, you had peats.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 For the fires?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, like - for the - we had to do cutting 
of peats and - when there was a big moss, and we had - we had to work with them and that was the fire for the - the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to help to go and get the peats too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Used to help to kind of build them up you know to - when they were - drying a
nd - oh there's a lot of work in the peat work, that's why they made - put up iron fires, it was a big -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it your mother or your father that did most of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They - they - they - they - had a big range you see in the kitchen and - and - and - they were grand fires put on. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother actually had a range at Lochur?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, had a - had a - a big - a big one you see, and - and a water tank at the side.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It heated the water as well did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, and - it - it - it - you know,
 he could - if it was boiling the - the - she - my mother - served it up like, but it was always there handy if you wanted it you see with this - this - tap - used to turn on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So if you wanted a bath or anything there was always plenty of hot water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Plenty of hot water you see, but the - the - all the - the - the gentry when they came they - they were - all - always taking on with it you see, they - just enjoyed them so fine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of house was it you had there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The - the - we
ll there was - there was - you see, we were - we went into the - the kitchen part was like - you kept to the - to the kitchen, and - and give them the full use of the - of - of the - we - the other bedrooms and things like that. When - when there were any
 
of them there they got the full - use - whole house you see. But - we just - gave away and - and - there was a big attic - up off the kitchen, and - and you - got - flitted up in there, and - and - and then there were - there were the big kitchen, out to 
-
 for - for the back door, and it went into the - the - a back kitchen, and - it was a - there was a - a place where they - used to keep - lots of things, you know, the - like - when - like when - shooting tenant, they brought this - a - maids you see, and
 - and their cook, a cook, and they had this part - in where they - where they worked and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 wretch}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
 with the things. So my - my mother helped them too you see whenever she could be free, and she used to help them -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How many bedrooms were there in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There was - there was - there was three anyway, there}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 were three large see, like there was a big - there was - there was like - there - the bathroom was downstair}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 , and - and the - and the toilet, and - and the - an then there was another bedroom
 - in - right - up the stair there was - there was like - two bedrooms, a - a big one, and - and - oh and it was wasna spare. 'Cos you see you had to accommodate the maids too you see. They had all their beds too, I think - I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did you usually sleep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh was up onto the - this big attic you see, and - and - it sort of divided - father divided it you see, like and you all slept up there. It was very - quite comfortable.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother and father too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Sleep one part and - and - and - and the rest of us - next part.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did you use to divide it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Like - the - a big - thick - cur - curt - a curtain, something like that. Do you - you see. Oh we managed - managed fine you know, it was - just had to - do - any - and - and outside there was - a lot of but}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
houses too you see, and - in - in - the gentry - used to have a place for their dogs too, they had their dogs with them and they - they - shooting - yes, their sho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ting - shooting season. Used to go out with their guns and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be quite exciting when you were a wee girl and all these visitors came with their dogs and all the rest of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. There was a - went to this wee school as I tell you, this was - it was three mile - and - and it was just - just
 the one class in it, you know, the - and we just had - was - was a woman teacher. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What was she like, was she nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she was good, an elderly body, and she used to - I - I'd sing, you know, and make us laugh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 and - and - she - and taught us lessons. And - and we had - what you call Bible classes too then. We had - Bible class -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did the teacher give you that or did the ministers come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The teacher - sort of taught, and then the minister came and gave us a sort of - a check up you see to see what we'd learned.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to learn the catechism and say it to the minister?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I had to, aye, just something like that. Oh, and - it - it was grand you know, mother - mother was awful vexed to get away from her because - it was
 - it was a good way a deal - and then - with this long journey see - with the - with - with the flitting as you look at it, with the flitting. And - it was - oh it was a long - a long way - a long way up to - to get the furniture you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you do flitting in those days before you had great big furniture vans?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Ah - in a - it was horse - horse and cart. A horse - horse and cart. There were two - there were - there were two lo - two loads, two big loads - on like horses and carts, with - wit
h - the big heavy - big heavy carts that they had for - that they used for the - for hay I think you know for building up hay in a - when they were taking it into the fields.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to take animals with you as well when you flitted?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, the cows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You just had to walk them all the way had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
They - they - they - mother looked after their own cows of course you see, the - the rest of the stuff was left for the - incoming tenant you see. And - and the things was left for the incoming tenant.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get there, did you go in the cart aw well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, we went - we went to mother - my sister and I, we went with mother in - in - and - and the two cows, the two - I think it was the two cows, that's right, and - and - two cow
s and two stecks you'd call them, stecks, that was the - the cows that was - growing up you see, and so they - they - I thought it was - I thought it was a long way but - somehow the - it - we got there you know and it was sort of easy, like -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did it take you more than one day to go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No, no, we just started off early in the morning. Early in the morning for to - for the - to flit you see. I think it was about the May term at that time and it was light in the early morning and - and - they st
arted off with the - the - we saw - we saw the - the furniture and the stuff on. I can always mind - remember my - my mother - had to - so she s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 hould have packed her hat. She h}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 adnae a hat to put on you see, you see, she - she packed - put it in a car you s
ee, and - and - and this was - here - the stuff was onto the - big cart before - and - and - her hat was with it you see, she never got hat down. So she just - I think that she had a - an apron she sort of put round her head. It was - it was dry - when we
 
started, but it was an awful showers you see come on. But I - how ever the young shepherd wanted her to take his - his muffler - for to put - put round her you know and that you see. It was great showers coming, and she said, my hat's up there, she says. 
However they did - they got in and - and got settled down, but - but there worst of the thing - was with}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  the - to car}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
ry - when you got up to the Carco cottage, you see, it was under repair, it was needing repair you see, and - and - and - people were elderl
y, they were leaving it you see - because they were elderly and finishing off with it, well - it had - it hadna been able for to do the house here much you know. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Had your mother seen the house before she moved in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. The - the mother wouldnae have seen it - or - or anything. Just - took it at random you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She wouldn't be very happy when she did see it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. She lost a - she broken you see, there was a - it was a kind of steep incline - up for the road, like up to bring it up to
 the - to the door where we was you see below, and - and - I think there was one of the barrels - rolled off you see and - and she had dishes and things in that. She lost an awful lot of things that way. It rolled over.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It wasn't the best of days for her was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It wasn't the best of days, no. So - and then - there were neighbours - there were neighbours just like what they call the plough - the ploughmen, the ploughman and his family was just like across - across the way where their cottage was - along there.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Qyite near?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It was there, they were - they were neighbours like, I mean the nearest neighbours. And - and - oh there were a lot of folk helping - one thing and another. That - her and they got them in and then my father had - alwa
ys had two dogs you see, always had his two dogs. So he kept them in the house, at night, for - the - the wire you see, the wire was away at the fire - like far end, it was - there was like the - the - the door - they put on - they - there werenae - there
 
werenae the light doors you see 'til they get it repaired so it was just a sort of patch up you see. And - I think that's - the - it so happened - I think the - rats had got in, see there were - there were box beds, what - what you - what you call box bed
s
. There were two - two very - two box beds in the kitchen, and - and there was just a room in the kitchen like see but there were - a kind of big size you see. Aye. Good sized room. But - but - the - there were the two box beds. So that was - all right, b
u
t the - and - and father - oh he wouldnae have his dogs lying outside or - or outhouses or anything, depended on his dogs. So - mother had to - had - take - take their big table - set before - they - they were good sized windows too, there was well enough
 - and - and - so she put the - window the - the mats in - in - underneath the stable for the dogs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The dogs were in the kitchen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So - a great scurry went up one night and - here it's a rat. And it was scampering across the floor. And - and was 
kicking up a row. Wasn't like - didn't like the idea of the rat being in the house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did the dogs get it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
So my fath - my father had the dogs on him. To get them that way, aye. But she - I - I can aye mind him bringing - bringing out the dogs for three or two months to get out the rats. Terrible. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were bothered with a lot of rats there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, there were - to - you see, through tying - the - there were none you see - for - were pushing some in - in - like during the night crept. 
Aye. Oh we cleared all the place for them you see. But - we got our - after we got all the repairs done you see there was no - chance of them getting in you see or anything. It was all - all -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Once you got rid of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. And we boarded up and
 that and a new door on, the only thing the door - the only thing the door opened out instead of opening in, you know, the door - the - the main door, that's the door to get into - so - they - it opened right out. Oh it was a good - put on a good door, a 
g
ood sound door and everything - and that but - anybody came to the door - you see - it was all right when - when some of the friends used to come, used to have a joke you ken about - about the - mother opening the door and squeezing them in the wall, you 
know. But - but it - it kept - it kept out - the stuff out you see, there were no bother to any - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 vermin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  or anything li}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 e that in it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You weren't bothered with any of that at Moniaive?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, no. It - it was - was - was I would say - I think it
 would bethree mile - was - was a good wee bit off Moniaive too you see but it but - but it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That would be the nearest place for shops?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - in - in - in some of the grocers you see the grocers vans came up through - see, come - come alon
g - up from - from Sanquhar - you see, yes, bro}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
ght stuff up to the door you know, 'cos mother or - mother brought - they brought the big - the - quantities of flour and oatmeal and - and like that - in big quantities you see, for to keep in. Keep in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You'd need to stock up for the winter there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Had to stock up for fear of - fear of snow you see. Aye. Oh there was - oh when there was snow storms there - some snow storms, terrible. With the - the - the - when you - when you - when there was a snowstorm, you see, they had to feed the sheep. }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 T}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
hey had to bring them down and feed the sheep you see, 'cos - they were high, 'cos they were high up hills, and - and it was - feeding the sheep, and they were carting out the - carting out the - the - this fodd
er as - as it - hay and stuff and - and that for - my father was there helping you see, and - he - and the - in the - Mr Hunter was there as well, but - he had - whether it was the cold weather and the excitement or no, he - he - he took a - he took an il
l turn my father like, when - and he was lifting some of the - this stuff.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The heavy bales of hay or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And - and he - he - he - he just - he just was like - he just was like - falling down - when Mr Hunter just a got a hold of him, and h
e - he just happened to be beside him, and he - he got a hold of him and - we werena there at the time you see, it was just the workmen and that that was out. So he gave him a - a right good slap on the back, you ken, and - and - and - and helped him, hel
p
ed him down with them, he says - he brought - brought him - gave him to speak then, he was able to speak, he couldn't speak. So - it - he - he says you don't do anything more just now, he said, we'll just get you home. They got him home. It was a strained
 heart, he strained his heart, that was what the doctor said. He said he had strained his - \{BLANK\}
 That was a good wee bit from Moniaive you see, and - and - while he was there of course when - when the shooting time is - come - came in - they had a car yo
u see, and - and then he used to run his two things you see. You know, at - at - at Moniaive like, from the house if there was anything special on. Used to take us out you see, like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it from the twelfth of August that they started to come when the shooting started?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When the shooting started, they came out - they - the one that - to}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 
ok it over was - was from Liver}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 pool, a - a Mr - a Mr Hepburn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was he your landlord?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. He was the - he just took on - it was - Stubbs - Stubbs and Calnder was the ones that - that - that -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That owned it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, they owned it like and they were let - my father's - boss you see, and then - the - the - there were a young herd in the house too, the - see mother had to work with them all you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She had to look after the herd as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, look after them all, in - and - the - it was a good way of living but it was a lot of work to do. But my mother - mother somehow seemed to have - strength to do it, I don't know, she steadied - and 
- and it was pigs you had to work with. Peats. And - and - in this big range - the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it a big kitchen that you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It was a good big kitchen, flag floor. And - and - and then you had the - the back door - the back door and then there were a
 side door, that - that - that you could use, that you could use, but you - and you had - and then - and then there's a front door. Of course we didnae use the front door when the gentry was there, but when you had - when there were none of them there, yo
u had the full use of the whole house. All the time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Which did you like best, when the people were there or when you had the house to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - it was cheery while the people were there you see. We had a lot of them and they were very friendly and very kind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you have to call them, did you have to call them ever madam, that sort of thing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - oh well - sir - well sir was the thing for some of them. Some of the gentry, they - were - pretty well of you see, they - they - t
he head maids - the head maids - they were - friend - connected with Mr - with Mr Hepburn and - and he had - the big - tobacco - firm you see, you know the - Hignet Tobacco. Well there were - I think there were two brothers that used t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 o come - but it was for the shoo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ting season that they came for you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they ever bring any children that you could play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No they - no, they were - they - they had no small children like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were just grown ups?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There was - there w
as a - there was a daughter at - daughter, she was - brought with them - a granddaughter of Mr Hepburn's, and - and she was very fond of us and - and she used to - play about with us outside you know and - and - well - in among the hay and she - used to t
ell us stories of - one thing and another. She - she was a - she was - she was on holiday as well yours, and she said - there were always a - a basket of pears come on the scene, then we got some pears to eat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had a grand time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we'd plen - we were awful happy. They were - they were awfully good to us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
What about a normal day when there was nobody else living in the house, who would get up first when there was just you and your family there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - my mother would be doing the 
fire and that, and then the young herd helped her to because he was - he was good in the house the young fel - the young her - young shepherd, he was - he was - from a shepherds house too - right down in - at Dunscore.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And so he would be used to a house like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
And he did a lot to help - lots of bits of things to help. And - and then my father had to be up early for the hills you see, to see what was going on there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did he go out into and around the hills in the morning and then at night again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
He - at morning - he had to see the - see if they were all right you see. And especially in the lambing time, you see, they - they were - he - he was on the go two or three times. And you see - finding his way around. And feeding the lambs if 
they were heeding any attention. That's somebody knocking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your father always come home for his dinner or did he sometimes take a piece with him?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He - he - I - he took his piece with him if he was going to be working lately or - but he - he
 - he mostly got his - dinner. If he didnae get home - mother aye made his dinner at night you see. Made the - good meal at night, aye. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have a big breakfast in the morning, did you get a cooked breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, we'd - porridge. P
orridge and - and then - fry a fry after. Mother was a great baker of - of potato scones, you know, oatmeal scones and - and - and flour scones - flour scone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she bake on a girdle or did she have an oven?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She had no - she worked with a girdl
e. She - she had the oven too on this range you see, but - she used to keep things hot in it, she - she didnae do so much in the - on the - she - mostly the girdle she was baking with. She - she - she - she did - she liked the plain sort of scones you kno
w
, and then she had a - a hanging oven, what you call a hanging oven, you know, the - that's - that's just like a - an ordinary pot but a - different shapes - different shape they are. And then - she used - she hang - she used to hang it on to cook, she wa
nted to cook - they had hooks in -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Up above the fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, on the swee and - and the hooks was there, and - you see, the - the - she used to make the - what you call bannocks, bannocks, big bannocks. Yes. She would - make - maybe two at a time, a
 big brown one or a - or a - and a big - white one. You know, in fruit in and peal as well you see, in - and - and - but she had to - see to them, 'cos it meant that - that there was a fire underneath and she had to - get a fire on the lid, on the lid of 
the pot you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had to put some fire on top of it as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, on the top of the lid for to cook the top part of the - of the bannock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So that you didn't get the bottom burned and the top not cooked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 That's - aye, oh}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  dear, she ma
de many a good feed in - so honestly she - and - and she used to - just peep in you see to lift the tins and - and peep in to see if they werena getting too burned - too hot or that. And I mind many a good feed - bannock she made.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she ever make bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Bread? No - no - no, she - no, she never tried the bread I don't think that it - it was mostly the plain scones and that you know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she buy bread in then or did you just eat the scones instead of bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She - I think once a week m
aybe - that you got the bread when the grocer came. When the grocer came with the order, and that, but - but she - she made do you see with - with - we - with having the - stuff that she made too as well you see. She did a lot of baking. She did a lot of 
baking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she make jam as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, she'd a grand big garden. Very big garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 With a lot of fruit in i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 t?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Yes. Blackcurrant bushes and gooseberry bushes and - and plenty of rhubarb and - all the things - just - just right. S
he made the jam. Of course you see - things was cheaper then you see, in - in - and she always kept plenty of sugar in. She made the jam and the - curd, and - have -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Enough to keep you through the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, she hard - we hardly ever needed to buy any - any jam or that. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she ever make pickles, did she ever keep beetroot or anything or onions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Onions I think, I think - and ket - ketchup, she made a lot of ketchup. Yes, see that's - mixed - mixed pickles isn't it, you know, th
e - things she used, and then that - that was a great thing for the - for - for to go with your potatoes you see, we'd always - plenty of potatoes in your garden and that. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You would grow enough potatoes to keep the family over the winter?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Y
es, we just kept ourself going well. And - and then - they - if they were needing anything extra - she - she just told the grocer like, we was three miles off Sanquhar were the town you see, where the - the grocer's place was. - But he come this - come up
 on the - on - with the order, and then if there was anything else or extra - she - she - she put in - they would deliver them again, come a special journey - and deliver them. And then of course we had to get our coals from the pit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You got your coal straight from the pits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, and a - well - a certain amount you see to - I mean to - to keep us straight, if - if we co}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ldnae get the peats to work out you know. The peats had - the peats had to be - nice and dry for - for kindling - for kindli
ng up, and then - there was - there was - some - it was larger - you - mother used to bank the fire with them you know like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you didn't need a roaring fire?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, no. She - oh - we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Who went out to cut the peats?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh the 
- the - the - we were all out at that job, the - the - the - my father had a - we were all out at that job, there was a big peat moss - one of the - one of the fields - that was away low down, and you just called it the peat moss you see because it was th
e kind of - stuff for the peats and - and then - there were - like the father and the young herd and - then the boys, the two boys helped us do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your cousins?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mm. And - and}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  - you - you used to go down - i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 f - if we was on school holidays, we wa
s always helping too you see, and see you gather them - lift them up and lay them out to dry and - and a - a lot of work you know turning - and loading them up for to let the wind through them and - it takes a lot of work for to get them right. But it was
 a bit away from the - it was a bit away from the house like you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you would have to carry them down to the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There was - and there was - well they used a - a horse and cart too you see, to get - they used to have a ca - a horse and ca
rt. Aye, there was a stable - you see, outside in the close - there was a stable, and - and - then there was the - big byre. There was the big byre for the - was - where - mother - looked after cattle - for them, for byre - our own cows, she had her own c
ows as well. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I don't know where she found the time to do it all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh goodness knows. We just wondered what - what she got the strength. She did stick in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have a hot meal at dinnertime, in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. W
hen we were at - we took a piece with us like - like when we went to the school. That was when we were at Lochur like, you see - that - we took a good piece with us - for midday because the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Like sandwiches or something?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, like that, mother made it extra. And then she gave us a good meal when we come in at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of thing did you get to eat at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well she would fry - it would be - fry, you know, it would be a - fried ham and eggs and potato scones and quite often, an
d - and - of course if she - if she had potted meat you know, she made potted meat and all you see, when there was a - at the pig killing time there was always - was always plenty - going. And then - the black puddings we - when she - when she did the bla
ck puddings - she - they were a - a - like a pulley, she needed a pully, and she - and she - strung them up up there - to dry 'til they - she was ready for - working them. Slice them down and put them in the pan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you all ate together at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, most of us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did the herd eat with you as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes. Yes. Yes. You see, there were - there were other two shepherds. There were other two shepherds but they werenae - connected, they were just like - that - that their - my - March Dykes and
 that you see like - and there was - that was - there - I think a Mr Goorlie - Goorlie I think they called him was - was their master you see, and there was a - a lead - a big lead - what they called the lead, of water - divided the - the fields. Aye. Jus
t off the - off the road - where there Geddes left on one side, and Hamilton on the other, and that was our neighbours like, mother}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 made neighbours of them. She'd go and see them and that and they'd come over to visit us and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they go visiting at night, because she wouldn't have very much time through the day to go visiting would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no, they - they used to come and see her. Used to come along and see her I think - Mrs - Mrs Hamilton wasna so very strong, she - had something about her
 stomach that wasnae very good, but she had a daughter and - and she used to come and - and see mother and that and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she ever take you out visiting with her when you were wee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - we went - to - out to - mother never went away without us. My sister and I, one on each side. You see, down to Dumfries.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You went to Dumfries to do shopping did you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, you see, they - we could do that with the - with - a - there were a - a bus I think running from Dunscore or somewhere - we us
ed to - used to go there -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of bus was it, was it a horse bus?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 A motor bus?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It - just a - well, when I think on it was - there was horses - horse buses, but it's a sort of a - a gig you know as used to call them. And you 
- you used to get a big lift in that way, see, 'til you got in - to Dumfries for the - for the fair you know, used to come -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You came in to the fair did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mother come - took us in to the fairground. That's the - the March fair and the Root fa
ir, go down with bits of turns on - on - oh the - place - sands in Dumfries was crowded then you know from top to bottom. Far different now than what it is - and - and there was wee - wee horses you know and - all like that you could - could always - go o
n the horses.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That would be quite an exciting time for you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Quite - quite - it was quite exciting for us see. So we was - well she never - she nev - she never went away without us you know, she - she just - took them away along, took us away
 along and then you had a - you had your dinner - dinner in - in the town, get it in - it was in the sands, it was in - the Vennel then where McKie's the restaurant was, McKie's restaurant it was, oh they were great old fold, we - you know, have - and tha
t was where we could go to - to - to get our dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had your dinner there and then you would be going back at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Went back at night, quite the thing you see, no hungry or anything, and we -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was your father able to come with you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No then, no, he - no - he was - with the sheep he - he left - he didna leave the farm. He - he didna leave the place very much, he - like - when - when it was a busy time you see he never left the place much. But it was just a - it was - it was jus
t a case that it was like a - a day out for us you see and - we enjoyed it. And - and then you got into this - McKie's was a - and - broth was - broth was the main menu, farm broth was the first course. Bowls of broth. And - and - mother wa}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 s aye in there you know in the c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ent}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 r}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 e and - and - so - it was just - come away lassie, see - you - your soups ready, you ken, my sister and - and me waiting. But we enjoyed the soup.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was your mother good at making soup too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, oh she made the broth and - potato soup.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get soup often?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Often. Yes, soup often. Potato soup and - and - oh and then the broth. Because there was plenty of vegetables with having the big garden. Big garden.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get meat to eat every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - well we 
sometimes just got the - the - the butcher meat, you know, the - there were no - there were no - vans come round with - with butcher meat or that. But you could - could get - could get - quantities you know like - sometimes you might - would fry ham to th
e potatoes or - or - or make -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You ate a lot of your pigs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes - mother - aye, mother made - broth of - black puddings, white puddings, and she made haggy - a haggis you know like that. And -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever eat rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - oh yes, yes,
 that was - you see, there were - that was in the days when there were nothing - there were good healthy rabbits you know. Tat's right, yes - oh yes, we had - the - father - had this dog that sometimes killed a - an odd rabbit you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your father didn't set traps for them did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, they - it was - they were on the ground you see, the - the rabbits like were on the ground there. And he brought them home - and cleaned them up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you in the way of getting fish up there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well, no. T
here was a loch - there - there - Lochar Loch you see - that - he - you could see it - from - from the - Lochar House, set kind of high up a bit, and you could see this big loch - so - so - we used to get a wee bit of trout or that out of there - when - t
he gen - gentry, some of the gentry liked fishing, and they had a boat to take - they went out in - and this - and this - bought in the fish in that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your father wasn't keen on fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. Oh no, he didna bother the lochs much. But it was - it 
was - pike - pike was something they used to - was in this particular loch. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Quite good to eat were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, they went - they went out for - in the early morning some of the - gentry that - that - that came on Mr Hepburn - they were all M
r Hepburn's - conn - connections you know through that, they'd always be -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Friends and relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mm-hm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever get any pheasants or grouse when they came shooting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh they came - it came into the house, they had their own cook with them too you see. Had their own cook.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But did you ever get a chance to get any of that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye - aye they got - they - they - they were good to mother with the birds, and the grouses and that. Yes. Pheasants. They - they - 'cos mother used to 
help the - the - the cook - for to clean them you see, and I mean she was - she was elderly but she was awful good, she was Irish, but she was an awful clever cook.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was she a nice person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, cook. And she made things and - and - she - so - so 
she - she used to get in - it's - it's a wee bit off the back kitchen, she used to stay in there, and - and - make things you know and - mother used to sit and talk to her and help her and. -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother would enjoy the company like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Yes. So they were great -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were small did you have to help in the house much?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No - no - no really much you know I mean just - mother would - show us what do do or tidy up like you know and - do a bit of dusting and - suchlike as that you know No, but you wasna really asked to do an awful lot of that. You was outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you help in the garden at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - out - outside yes doing things, wee bits of things. Did working in the close and - and helping in the byre and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you like working with the cows?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
With the cows. And you used to - we used to - wash - their tails you know and - and - pleat them up and - make them nice for - as if they were going away to a show. If they were going away to a show or a sale we were a
lways working with them. We seemed to manager to get - on fine with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your help your father with the sheep at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The - no so much on - no so much at Lochur - but when we was up at Carco we did, went with - a lot about with his sheep. T
hat was up Crawick Glen you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you help him at lambing time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
At the lambing time, and carries - carry milk - carry milk you see - to the - to the folds, and - and - in the folds where you had some of the men in, and - and - he could - warm the milk out of the flasks - for the - to keep them going. It was great.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever have any pet lambs down in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, aye, we'd lots of pets. Well actual pet lambs you would - pick them up you know and - and - we was aye greeting 
when they had to go you know, they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be just like losing a pet.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
That's it, was - although they were nae - or if there were any of them kind of - weakly father brought them in you see and - mother kept them near the fire, you - on the ru
g and that. Sort of - there were not time to they - 'til they were dancing round about the floor. See - it was a rough - it was a big rough heather hill - it had.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How many head of sheep would there be on it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh there were - about a score of shee
p we had. I'd no idea how many there'd be but there were two - there big - big lot - big hirsels as they call them, yes. And then - he had one lot, my father, and - and the young shepherd had the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your cousins help him at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, oh 
they - they helped, oh yes, they helped. And they went - you - you know they went - messages and - and went round about the - you know - round about the borders of the hills you know, just - sort of - s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 anding up the - the sheep you ken up on the high ground.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your father used them instead of a sheep dog?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, that's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your father help your mother in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 My father, no, he wasnae - he - he wasnae - he wouldna - he didna bother with the - with the house at - at all yo
u see, but he - he - as long as it was tidy and everything neat - you see, he just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about clothes, did your mother make any of your clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Clothes, well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Or did you buy them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we had to buy them you see. The - the - well th
ere were a - a tailor at Moniaive - used to make our better - better clothes, we had - we had clothes that you - you had on for through the day, you know, just working away in, keeping in the house but - if we had to go anywhere - you had - coats to put o
n
. And - and the - the coats with - with fur on the collar, you know, fur round the edge, they were brown coats you can mind that, and I went - mother took us in to Dumfries once to get - our photographs taken in. My sister was a wee bit taller than me, an
d
 - and - she stood at the side, and - and I stood up on a sort of kind of stool and you was - holding onto baskets of flowers, you know, just - just young, I was just - and - and you had - my mother had this - had this on with the hood is, you know, the -
 
mutches as you used to call them, but they were white you know, and - and - and she - yes, she used to starch them and do them up herself. Aye. And - and - and - and - and tied round with ribbon down your ear. They were - oh we were real swells when was -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have boots or did you have shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Boots. Boots. Boots, mother kept us in boots. Brown boots, button boots. Button brown boots, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were an awful job to put on in the mornings were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well they - had them - we'd that f
or special ones anyway. I think we had - strong lacing boots for going to the school with you see, 'cos you had to over this - this - hilly ground to - go on a footpath you see. For -;
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You'd need something strong?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. We were always - afraid f
or the adders you see. An adder. Because they could come out and sun themself in - near the water and that. Adders. Awful I didna like them, I'd have run far enough away from them. But I got to the - I got to the school all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you start school when you were five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Three. Well - when I was at Drumnail I started - we started - I started at school when I was at Drumnail. And my sister was away before that. And - and the two boys you see, they were away like to Kirkgunzeion school. And you see
 I couldnae - I couldnae think to see them all going away and leaving me you see like so - so I used to cry - on them and to - to get back, get to school - away to school with them, and - mother however - kept us back as long as she could you see, but - I
 was just - about three - then - and you see it was just early enough age you see for the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I'm surprised the teacher let you go when you were so small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 However - it was a - it was a good - it was a good distance. I - I can mind - you see but - i
f I - as long as I was with the boys you see - I wasnae - I was - all right. David - John - he - he - he was kill - he was - killed in the first world war. But he's - got a hold of my hand, and - and he made this - this walk - a very - and down into Kirkg
unzeon for the school. It was just the two teachers. There was a Miss Jordan - there - there was a - a Mr Milligan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was he the headmaster?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mr. Milligan was the headmaster, and Miss Jord}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 n come in with the next lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She would take the younger ones?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Aye. That was the days of the soup kitchens, do you - the soup kitchens, was - then. Oh - we had - had sup - soup kitchens - certainly. And - and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You would get some soup at dinnertime then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The - the - plenty made - and they come around with a tin of - in - bowls of soup in there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to pay for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I don't think we - I think - I think - a little passed for it, but no much. But it - it - it was always eaten with your dinner. Yes.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It must have been a long day for a wee soul like you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes. Yes. Yes. It was a long day but you see - I - I - I wasnae real - I - didnae get staying at - at - at three o'clock - I didnae get staying at the school - because I was three. But - the - teacher said - sai
d - she thought I was to teach something to show, you know, just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Something to keep you occupied?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
So - so - so - mother had a - a bit of red - you know, just like a - like a red hanky, you know like they used to have, and - and - she thought it
 would just do for the time being you know just - and - and - it was supposed to be hemmed. And - and this was - would do for a duster or - of a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you able to sew when you were three?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I - just - I wasnae able to sew very much you see, but I
 got a - I - I - I learned the - it was gathering into the - so - so I had the - I had the - mother threaded the needle, it was mother who gave me the thing, and the needle with it - with the stuff, and - and this was - I was supposed to - to go round it 
y
ou see, sort of - a running you see, I wasna like sort of - hemming or anything or stitching that way, but - however - I got a hold of this thing and - and I thought I was doing fine you see, I wasnae long at going round it with this - with this running s
titch. So of course the - it didna please Miss Jord}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid11414884\charrsid5586003 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
n you see. She - so - I - I got - I got the stuff - packed - she packed up the stuff and - and I had to get home at night you see. I had to get home with the rest of them, she - she wasnae pleased at all. 
She says, you're far too young anyway for to come - to come here - and - and - and - she canna do that work anyway, so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you not get to go back to the school then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, but she - she - they - they didna use the tawse you see but she had a can
e that she used, and she come over my fingers, you know my fingers. Aye, she got the - the cane, she was a - she'd an awful temper. Every time I saw her photograph I scratched her face. I hated her. I couldnae stick her at all. And - and you see - I can a
y
e mind - I was greeting you know and my - my hands were swollen up you see, 'cos she had - she had leathered me. And you see I had no more thread than the one thread that was in the needle and that. And that wasna pleasing her either you see, and - and - 
a
nd - that, so that wasna pleasing her. Wasnae doing at all. So her - when I come back at night you see - I - I was greeting - and - so - I showed my mother her - my hands were swollen up, all me hands were swollen up and I - and so they wondered what had 
happened you see. So I said, I - I got a - I got this each from the teacher I says, I got a leathering from the teacher. And - so that was enough. So I - I wasnae back - then - 'til I - was five I think. Aye. You see. So. -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it the same teacher when you went when you were five?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
There were - there were - yes, she'd be on then too. The - the - I can aye mind sitting on the doorstep - I - I - I knew - knew that I hadna to go back you see, 'cos she said - said it would - my father was awful angry,
 and he said he would go down to the - headmaster about it - because he thought it was kind of cruelty to hurt - a wee dot. But she - they did things like that and - and - they darenae do now. So - the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they very strict in this school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes
. Strict. And - and - and Mr - Mr - Mulligan, well he was just as strict with the boys too because I mean - it was just a bash on the - on the ear you know or - or just a - slap for anything they do, he wasnae very - he was quite a good schoolmaster but h
e
 - he - he could lay into you, so - because - one - Robert - the - the younger cousin - he got a - he got a - a - a - a crack for something that he - had done and - and - and Mr Mulligan had - had a ring on and it left a mark on his face, he had a ring on
 
his finger you see Mr - Mr Mulligan. It left a mark. Well my father was wild with him, he went to him - wrote to him - and - and went to - about him. And he said he would have to - he'd report him you see, and anyhow - Mr - well of course he was Mr Mullig
a
n and he was a registrar and - he was everything in the parish you see, you see - so it - he said, it'll no be worthwhile or something he says, he says, just keep your child at home for she's too - too young to be here like that. I never was back with han
ds - go - my hands got gradually down, mother atten}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ed to them. Sent them down. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was your mother good at that sort of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was she a good nurse as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she was a good nurse and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she ever make her own medicines with herbs and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Her own what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Medicine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, I - I don't - I think she just used the castor oil was mostly the - mostly the - medicine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Craigmoy school?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Craigmoy school was the wee school out - it - there were just the
 one classroom in. Were just the one classroom in - but they were - we were all - like - and - in different - different wee bits that - that the ones were learning you. They were shepherds sons and daughters most of them you know from round about. All rou
nd about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mostly people like yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, just that - we all gathered you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you like that school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh it was fine. We had it for the - for the whole three year that we were at Lochur you see. And my sister was with me to
o then you see. But it - it - it was from the - that you flitted up Crawick Glen you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were at Craigmoy did you have to take a dinner to school, did you have to take a piece?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, you had to - you had your piece you see, carried our pieces, and then you had a good - a good meal at night when you come back. Aye.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What time did you have to leave in the morning? You would have to be up quite early wouldn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Had to - see the school there - the - the - they never said anythin
g if we was late or anything, the teacher just lived aside the school you see, she was a lady teacher and she just - elderly body and she - oh - she was very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was there anything she was specially fussy about? About you being clean and tidy or the way you spoke or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh she liked - she liked us to be - clean and tidy and - and - and that too - and - and - and the way - there were different times you see that there were - wee bit of exams you see, was - and - and there was - s
he taught the Bible lessons too you see, and l then a minister - our minister - come in and sort of kind of questioned us a wee bit. Sometimes you - sometimes we managed and sometimes we didn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But she wasn't all that worried if you were a bit late coming in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no. No, she - no, no, it was - 'cos the most of us had three miles to walk. For - for coming down right round about.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she ever punish any of the boys or girls?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh no - no punishing, not just I mean - she had a
 wee strap that she used to - check us up away with she would. But she didnae cane us like the Kirkganzeion one. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things would you get the strap for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - maybe if we did - hadnae paid attention to the - to some of the quest
ions you see. That - when she was wanting for an answer for and that. Or that we couldna recite - some of the bits of poetry and things you know that she wanted us.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Both boys and girls got the strap sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, we just - we just - we all sat togeth - sitting together, and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She didn't make any differences?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. And we used to stand about in a circle you know just to - and if she was free we'd play any wee games you know and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It wasn't all work then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, she sai
d - she had - she used to teach us wee bits of things you know. Because it - for the sake of the - the - the younger ones you see, we were -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You liked it bet}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 er there than you did at Kirkgunzeon then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, much better. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were all the children there friendly, were there any of them not so nice?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes, they were, we all agreed very well, yes. The - we - we - played together, we - we got out to play you know like that, but - there were no - we didn't have any rows or anything or any - kicking ups - no, no. They were very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did the teacher have any pets in the class?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no. No. No, I think she just - we just were all sort of - a - alike you know. She knew that - that - we - we were shepherds daughters and shepherds sons and - it was - just that she was teaching - around about. Very nice.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you like it when you went to Crawick Glen then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Crawick Glen?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about the school there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh that was Sanquhar school. A big school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be a change for you from a wee school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It - it was a big school. We started - started us off in - in class five - like - like when you started at Sanquhar school. My sister - my sister wasna long - at the school you see she was a wee bit older than me but -
 she left - the - the - Sanquhar school - for to - take up dressmaking, she wanted to learn the dressmaking. And - and things like that she - so they - I just - you know, carried on myself like. And - oh I was there - I think it was fifteen - I was fiftee
n before I left the school there. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was quite a long time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I - I stayed on - different - with the different classes you see you had to go through.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What were the teachers like at Sanquhar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they as nice as the lady you had?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
They were very - they were very nice and - and they were very good teachers, but they did - they did like you to pay attention and - and - and - and - and - do what they wanted you know you to do. It sometimes could be - quite a stiff thing
, they used to give us the - cards home with us you know, what they call cards with - with our things and that was homework, and we'd to do that at night. So I did - I never got right the - minding at all for that, I said I didn't understand the cards I u
sed to say because I went home I was - I used to be helping mother you know with bits of things you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Helping her in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Uh-huh. And - it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get into trouble at school for not doing the cards then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, well - you 
got a telling off to - pay bit more attention you see to it. One thing and another. But it was - that was more in the qualifying class you see Tere was - there was - we started of in - in standard five, and then - oh he was a - there were all men teachers
 
then, he's a very funny old body the one that taught us in standard five, a Mr. Salmon, and - and he - oh he used - he was pretty strict too but he - he used to tell bits of stories and - and - he - he - like that, a good - we got on no so bad with him, h
e was kind enough you know. And if we were wet - go - going in - he - he made us - change our stockings and - change our - take off our boots and our stockings, get them dried.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had a fire in the classroom to dry the things at had you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That -
 well there were - there were pipes too I think you know. For - for - we would - we hadnae to sit them wet you see, with wet feet or that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you had such a long walk to go to school you would sometimes be quite wet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Yes. We had good - good strong - strong leather lacing boots like for the - for this ground, see. Rough ground.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were there times when you didn't get down to the school at all? Because of the bad weather?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - it - it would only be when the - when the snowstorms, -
 if the snowstorm's like on - before we - before we - go down - I mean - seen been - I've seen us being caught in - in snow showers or - things like that, but - not - no - wading through deep snow - you see. We just stayed at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about your dinner at this school then, you were saying there was one school where you went where they made soup for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - oh that was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was Kirkgunzeon was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, that was Kirkgunzeon, that was the days of the soup kitchens. But - we had no -
 we had no meals - at - at Sanquhar. The - the - dinners you see, there were no dinners at Sanquhar school, but - they - mother - was friendly - with - we - had to come to Sanquhar for - for - lots of things you see. I mean - at - there was a grocers vans
 
now that come up the Glen, come up Crawick Glen the - the - that - there were lots of things that - mother had to go down - need to buy and - she was a great sewer too, making things and - and she had to come down then to the - to - into the - there was t
wo or three - clothing places where she could get - buy the stuff. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't have men coming round visiting the farms selling material and things like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, there were just - there were just - the bodies that - used to come with th
eir ba - to the door with their baskets and that and - mother used to buy - needles and thread from them you see, she used to keep some in like that - patronize them maybe. Give them a pi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ce and - that you know. But the - it was - it was handy if she ran o
ut of anything you see. Oh they would have done a message for mother too or a - some of the old bodies that used to come round.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were quite good were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, in the country. And - they - they sort of wandered about you know, among the - 
shepherd's houses, and - was well out into the country. So they - the the McNellans - the - the Mc Nellans - what do you call it - the cloggers in Snaquhar, he - he was a clo}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ger then, 'course they're - they're all away now, the - the old - the older ones.
 But - they - we got to know them - through - it was a - it was - Robert McNellan I think that got the - got the one that was a clogger I think. And - and - he had a brother in Dumfries, a tailor - a - a tailor body, Joh - John, well heawas always amongst
 
a - the sewing family you see my father was - was a - aye, he was a - a Swan - and - and - and in fact they were far out connected, so - we got to know them through that and - and - Mrs McNellan - find - she had a young daughter - she - at the - in the - 
a
nd she happened to be in the same class as us you see, and I couldna think - she says, we're friends, she says, you - we're friends. I couldna think who she was at all you see, because we was just a stranger in the district. But however - it come that - M
rs McNellan says - you see, mother always gived us our pieces you see. And - so Mrs McNellan said she would - she would make us tea - or - or - give us soup, whatever we wanted, a plate of soup or that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Something hot in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, yes, for the midday meal. And that - that did us 'til - 'til we come off - home at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you would get quite friendly with the McMillans like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, McMillans they were - they were far out connections you see with the Swans, they - and
 - and - so quite enjoyed our wee bit as it turned down you know, the - her family, she'd a good big family Mrs McMillan - and and - there - there were - there were one - grown up, they were grown up you see. And one of them was teaching. You know, was te
a
ching away in the country. Ella - Ella was the - the daughter and she was teaching away in the county. They were none of them farmers - they werena married then any of the families - and then there was an elder daughter - she had a wee shop - just - just 
down the stair from where the father and mother lived. And - and she - sold sweeties and biscuits and - all bits of thing like that that she could -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever get pocket money when you were wee? To go and buy the odd swe}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 e}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ty or so?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - no, no
, we got pen - we got pennies, pennies - sometimes - to buy a wee bit extra if mother hadnae much - much to put in our pieces you see. Or - fi there was a shop - there's a - there was a wee shop - near to the school at the Sanquhar public school, and }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 - and we - they could sell - sel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 l us wee bits of things for our penny.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you get?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
A - sometimes - sometimes a bake or - or a - or a roll or something like that, we had - or a scone, it's whatever we wanted. It depended. Oh they 
were really very good and then you only - got to know - got know us you see, 'cos we had to come often to Sanquhar with father and mother you know with - with different things that they had to get you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When did you finish school, what sort of time day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh we finish - we finished at afternoon, like - like at time, if it was - if it was like - being a wild night or anything like that they - they let us away earlier, they didn't like - 'cos they knew that you had that way - that three mile to go
. Used to get - get away before any storm started. But - the - that was the San - the - the - Mr Salmons Class, and then we - we got shifted in to what they call the - qualifying class, was a - a Mr Mayor. A Mr Mayor, and he was - he was a - I think he wa
s
 a nephew of the headmaster's - that - the - the head - the headmaster was a Mr Carson, but they're - they're all gone now you see. But - he - he was an awful clever - clever man Mr Carson, and - that - we got in - supplementary class you had - he had you
 see so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was he a strict sort of person?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He was strict you see, but he was kind.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you get into trouble for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well I think it would - if you're no paying enough attention somehow you know, you'd get - he'd have gi
ve you a crack. To wake - to sort of waken me up - I think we were more like sleeping than anything else. You know we were away in the morning early and - and - and - and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What time did you have to leave home to get to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - I was
 away - we were away to get down for nine - I think the school went in about nine o'clock or - or thereabouts. And then you see there were - there were the - the other shepher}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 d}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 s - was - was further up the road and he had a son - at the at the - Sanquhar sc
hool too, and you got his company down, and - and - this - this young lad's - sister - she was the eldest of the family, Mrs - a Miss Carruthers, and - and she - she went to the - she - she got our company - she com - got our company, she was at a glove f
actory, the - the McGeorge's glove factory, the - in - and they made gloves, what they call the Snaquhar gloves. The - so as you got all that company you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There'd be quite a crowd of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were your cousins with you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, 
the cousins - no - you see - they - John, the eldest one, the - he went in to sit - situations you know for a while and - of course you always - wrote - come home to mother like for their homes you see. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He just have been a good bit older than you then was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh they were older, the boys were older than us you see. John - looked after me you see because I was - I was - the youngest one. And he - he was killed at the first world war. He - he - he went - you see - the - you know, he got tired
 of - of - of farm - farm service and - one thing and another and - and he thought he would - do better - going away to Australi}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 a. So - he went away to Austr}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 alia John did like. And - he got on well and he landed into some - big sheep station there. And - and they had - the - the - they had - they ride on ponies - to - through about the - station.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be a bit different from looking after sheep in Dumfries wouldn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Yes. It was a big difference you see. And - so we kept up correspondence with him - with him and that, and - 'cos -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But he wasn't living with you when you were at Crawick Glen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, they were - he werenae at Sanquhar school - the boys werenae at Sanquhar school
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They must have been old enough to finish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes - they were - see, and then - the - the Robert one, he - he went in for - he - he - he went in for driving. And driving I think a lot - because it - when he - he joined up too - but he - it was - dri - driving vehicles, that he - that he did. So - lik
e
 you didn't see so much of him again. And he - he went to - eventually away to Canada, to live in Canada. But he was quite pleased - they were awful grateful - for the way mother brought them up you see. Aye. And - and if they were ever near they always -
 come to see her.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were the children at Sanquhar school nice children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 At Sanquhar school? Oh yes, there were a lot of good - you know, the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were there a lot of miners children at that school there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes - yes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be a bit different?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Some from the country, some - some bits you see - some parts of the - would - mostly the - the - the town children, the - she shop}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 -keeper}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 's children, and - and - and the surrounding districts of the farmers too you see, their sons and daug
hters came to the school - as well, xo at a playtime - you see wealaw-ya - was got mixing with them. And then - when it was good weather we were out - there - there's a big - there was a big square - in front of the - it - well it's in front of the - acad
e
my, big square, in fact it was - the old church - the old parish church as I say that was there too - too. So - the - we used to - they used to bring us out and - and - sometimes in the - during - dumbbell exercise and - and other times it would be barbel
l
 exercise, you know, the big longs ones with - knobs at each end, and - and got this on the square - when it was dry you see. Be quite a crowd there used to be over there. I've seen - I've seen two rows anyway of this - you know doing this, and - Mr Carso
n
 - in - in the centre. He always wore a - hat - wore a hat - these, you know these - no bowler but - one of these kind of square crowned ones. And I mind his - oh he was - he was - he was really very kind - good - kind. Very considerate somehow, you know,
 just - they wanted to - to - to see you getting on, and help you, but he - he still wanted - to be strict you see so that he - you wouldna just do as you liked like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So that you wouldn't be lazy about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That's it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get music at the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Singing, aye, we got singing lessons. Singing lessons and - and - in both of the - aye, both of the classes and sewing, sewing classes we had too. The sew - the sewing mistress was a - a - a Miss Clennell and she had one of the teachers for 
an assistant used to come in and help. And - and help us. To cut it out, the cloth, you had cloth to cut it out, and - and we had sewing then you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you make?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I - I - I made a nightdress once. You - you see - and - and 
- just useful things for - for - and - and - they - they taught us to - to do - you know, flowering - flowering, you know, what they used to call flowering, that was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Decoration round the edges?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, you know the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Is that broderie Angliase?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I - I think so, you know, it was - you just aye call it flowering it, it was - it was a certain - no - no just like lace but - it was like done in - and it was done on the edges for - for nightdresses sometimes you see and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There'd be a lot of work in that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
She taught us you see. And - she - she was - she - she was a - a - she was a friend of - of Mr Carson's, they - she was away before I left the school I think. Before I left there. Yes, she was - she was awful kind and - to show us a
nd she says if you - oh. She says, you'll no be a mother if you don't have plenty of pins sticking about you. She used to tell you know. And so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you like singing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, I liked singing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have any musical instruments in the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well no, not in our own house, no, not in our own home, just a fiddle. A fid - aye, the fiddle. It used to - hang up - in - up on the wall, and - and there was a cousin - a cousin used to come and he was a - a player, and it was grand, we 
used to like to hear him playing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But none of your own folk played it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no, well my father used to - take it down off the wall and - and - and - fiddle away to it but I mean he wasnae like - taught like to fiddle it. But if anybody - come in that was a fiddler he - he just got - the - the - the fiddle to play.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever sort of sing together as a family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Sing - singing? Aye, well if there only - only old songs and - and - joining in the chorus and - and that - and that. Mother wa
s a great admirer of Bruns - and he - she got all these - things. She just - well you see we was eleven years up in Carco cottage you see up at - so that mother - she says - folk used to say to her, are you no lonely and that and don't know what you do fo
r fun, well we can make our own fun, like that, she said, you can make her ain fun, and then she -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you do then, like singing, did you do other things too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Like - when we were at home? No, just helping them - helping - wit
h the sheep like if it was a busy time I used to help my father. Like when - when we were on school holidays - we used to - help them. 'Cos my sister - she was at - the dressmaking you see, and - and that took her all day. She - she learned - she - she wa
s taught with a - a Miss Wilson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother said you made your own fun altho}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 ugh it was lonely, I was wonder}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ing what you did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, well - I - ayes, well we just - we just - be singing and - and - and playing and maybe hiding a wee bit there to wi
th the - with some of the rest of the - the shepherds boys, or - or - or the - ones - or the ploughmen. The ploughman was - was like across the close you see, the - we - we - we got a - the - there - there were - where we lived in was long like that and -
 
and anyway just across from it - across was where the - the - ploughman, the - he had a helper too but that was where he lived you see, and I think we went - the one that used to help him - was like a young fellow, he was up in the farm house. Farmhouse w
as away up the road a bit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So there were always children for you to play with if you had spare time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, there'd be - we had our wee bits of - our - our concerts and - and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get parties for birthdays at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Wee bits of 
parties. Wee bit of birthday parties, see. See she - now - no very far - we went up - went up to the other shepherd's house too, and he was a kind of comical body, he could - he could - recite and - and make - and - and play the violin too, he had a violi
n and - and he had his family about - about him like that And - and the - and the dumplings - the making of the dumplings was a great go then you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 This was for your birthday was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - making a big dumpling, a - a clootie dumpling you ken.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 With fruit in it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Mother had a - she had a good big - big pot - that she - I don't know how she lifted the thing, she - but - after I got on a bit I left - I - I - lifted them off the fire, and - and they were heavy. But she - she - this 
what she did, she mixed this big clootie dumpling. And - and - and it was - fixed up and - this - this pot was hanging on the - on the hook, and - had to - over an hour it was kind of - starting to boil and - and in went the dumpling. And then - she had a
lways to - to keep it boiling you see. Maybe be about two - two hours or more you see, it was a good size - 'cos they were all - it was full of - full of - fruit you see. And -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she keep a special cloth for making it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, yes, a strong 
cloth. A strong cloth that - that - that she - that - then she spread it out and put flour - on it - in it, and emptied out the - the - mixture, the dumpling - and then - tied it all up you see, like - left - left - left room a wee bit to swell you see. A
nd she popped it into the - into the pot to - and then she used to keep her eye on it you see after that no to let it get boil it dry you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So that was what you got for birthdays then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That is it. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get presents at a birthday or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No - like we just - just sort of - get a wee bit extra - something in the - like cake and a wee bit extra meal and that, you know, just -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about Christmas time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we all. -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get presents then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 We always got something in your stockings on Christmas Day. It was a great go - han}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ing up our stockings you know. And then you always got -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did you hang your stocking up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 At the back - at the bed side.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You took yours to bed with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Foot of the bed, aye. It was - oh it was a great fun to - like - these -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What would you get in your stocking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh just - just a lot of - you know like - we always had a big - we had had - shortbread and - home made shortbread - and - and - and cake
s or - and then - ribbon for our hair or - and - lots of things you know just that was - that you was - certain things you was needing you know. We always wore our - our hair long you see and - and - the bow - bows of ribbon you ken, was tied back - at - 
at the back with bows of ribbon.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You made quite a thing of Christmas then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, they - they all kept - we all kept it up you see that way, we just all had a wee bit - bit - bit tea, you know, with some of the neighbours you ken coming in and - and your neighbours' family and that, just a week bit happy night just amongst them.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How about New Year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh aye, we used to say -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have first footing and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, they - they all gathered you know, the - all someone come in 
late you know in New Year night and - and - we had a wee bit the same sing-songs and - and - and that, it was grand. A wee bit dance on the flag - flag floors there were. But mother had - rugs and - and that she laid out. Home made rugs she - you know the
 - she used to do - make her own rugs, rag rugs. There's none of that now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was there any drinking at Christmas or New Year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Drinking.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Drinking, oh aye, they - they did - they - they could - well, whisky was on the go you know
. But - the - it - it was chiefly tea you know, I mean it was tea - after that, tea to the dumpling and - and - and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did your mother and father think about drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh they - my father - my father took whisky you see, mother didnae drink
, mother didnae drink, she's - she's - she was very good at - at having it in the house if there were anything went wrong with us, when was away you see. When - when when was - anything was ill or that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But she didn't take any herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, she -
 oh no, she was sober. She was - she was - she was really a good manager my mother, she - she left my father - to - to all his own - own kind of work, you know, the shepherding and - and - and the working like that. But if there were anything went wrong w
i
th the lambs - it was - just bring them in to the fire, you know. And - and - and - and - they were - all - fed and sorted up and - laid on the rugs at the fire, the lambs. And in no time too they were dancing round about on the floor. For while - while -
 whiles they did - if they were kind of - far through - whiles they did get a wee bit teaspoonful of - of whisky, sometimes you know for a - for them - to help them on.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 To revive them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, to revive them. Oh it - it helped many a one that was weakly. Yes, it used to grand.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother wouldn't have a great deal of time for reading, did she read anything at all, did she have any books or magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. But got the papers. We got aye the papers see, see the grocer brought the papers up,
 and then the Standard too, always kept on - on with the Standard you see, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get a paper every day then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no, no, no}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 t }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 every day. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just when the grocers van came up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, grocers van brought up the papers for us. And 
then there was a postman you see come up too, the postman would come along you see, and - and got - got the stick up - if we had any letters to post - we'd to stick them up on the window, and - and you see when he was coming up the road, he could see them
, and he - and he'd come up to the door to get them, but - if there nae - nae sign of anything he - he kenned there wouldna be anything. It was three mile for the postman as well you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Would he come out if he didn't have any letters to deliver, would he still come out to see if there were any letters to go back?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, oh no, oh he - they delivered letters if they had any letters and that. Come up with them you see just to see them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But would he come up whether he had letters to deliver or not?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Like he - he come up if he saw the - them sticking on the window - you see. That's what they - they - whet he called the signs, if there's any to post, he says, just put them up you see - in the window, he says, I'll know, he says, I'll come up fo
r them. And he got always correspondence away. Oh they were very good. And then you had - I don't know this - we'd always to go that three mile - to Sanquhar you see - to the Post Office. If thedre were anything went wrong with the cattle. There's once th
e
re were a - one of mother's cows took milk fever, milk fever you see, she was awful grandmilker, but she - she took this milk fever, and - I mind I was - I was at home at the time just - and I happened to have my - my new bicycle. So - she - she said go d
o
wn with that - milk fever you see to - the - so the cow went down with it and - and - and so - we had to go to the - to have - to bring the vet you see. Like you hadnae a phone or anything in the house of that you see. So when - when - I got onto my bicyc
l
e and - and - and biked to Sanquhar. And - went in to the Post Office, I was going to send a telegram to Thornhill way see. But - I think the - the - the young man - assistant in the Post Office - took all down that was on the telegram you see, but I thin
k
 he would - phone through - to - to the vet at Thronhill, you see, immediately you see. No while I was there but it would - I was away. You see, they knew - they knew my mother and - and my father you see. Those that was in the Post Office. So - he - oh t
h
ere were wee bits of steep bits in the road and - and - and I walked them you see over - over a bicycle then. So - I was at - I - by the time I got up home, the vet had been there. And - he'd happen - they'd happened - we had - he had phoned - he had phon
e
d through to him. And he just got him - coming out of the door to go away. The - the - so he had just - he'd just come away immediately. You see, he knew - it was the shepherd's cow you see, it was the shepherd's cow that was down you see. So he said - sa
id, I - I'll be along immediately. So - he - he wasnae - he wasna long you see and he - and - well the cars was on the go then too you see, and he had his car and - motor type and he wasna long. He wasna long to put injections in it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And it cured all right did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Got a - got it - just - got it - just got it in time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was there many people with cars round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, well - were odd ones you know, they were beginning to - to come on - the farmers was - the farmers had their horses and tr
aps then. Werenae so many of the cars. But they were gradually getting them as time went oh you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 People like the vet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, that'}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
 right. So - so he was - they were quite pleased - to think that he - he'd - he could - he could - she'll be all
 right now he says Mrs Swan he says. He said, just keep her quiet and mother - give - made a hot drink for - for her and - but says, don't used the milk. He says, don't use her milk, he says - no. And - and we had pigs - we had pigs - but he said, it'll n
o do the pigs any harm you know you see, it wouldn't - didnae waste the milk but we werena to use it ourselves. So - aye, so the - it was - he was quite pleased about it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You say you had cows and you had pigs, did you have hens too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, we'd a lot of hens. Lot of hens, and - and a - we'd - we'd a big garden. A big garden you see for potatoes and vegetables.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And your father would have dogs I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have any other pets apart from that, did you have cats about the place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we'd cats, oh goodness knows, aye, we'd cats - dogs and pups and - we'd all that. Aye we - we had all that - when we was wee.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I suppose you would learn the facts of life quite early then, seeing puppies being born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we use
d to like - and - and he used to work away with the - with the cattle, the - the byre was full of - of cattle - the - and - but - they were like wintered and then he had to go away to - to Thornhill march through time you see, just before the - autumn fai
r sometimes they had to go to - right to Dumfries. But they - but - we used to - wash their tails, and - and - and - dress them up, you know, the cattle and - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go to the market with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, we didna go, father and mother - my fathe
r - my father was - went into - and then - the master of the - Mr Hunter would - mostly, yes. But it was a different times and I think it was - that was like counted the nearest, it was it were a big mart there then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Do you remember ever having a funeral in the family when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
A funeral? Yes, the - like - no out of our own home, but - but like - when I was small - my father's - father - and mother - you see. But they werenae - they werenae staying with us then anyway, but my father -
 father had - to - to go you see, they'd all to go. The - the - they were a lot of - a lot of brothers of them. And - and mother - mother did - did - did - had the starched shirts, you know, the starched shirts with - and - and - and - the tall hats, they
 
wore the tall hats and - the tall hats at the funeral then, and - and a - and their cut away coats you know, just - the - the - that was the - when my grandfather died. He's buried at Kirkmahoe church. He's buried in the churchyard - my father's father an
d mother. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But did children go to funerals when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No, no, don't think it - it - no unless it was - some of the - some of the big ones, older - but there - there were nobody I think - no small children at these big funerals
, you see, they - it - it was a - a - there was like the hearse then - it - it was done - drawn by a horse you see, and - and - we - my father - my father's father - was a shepherd too you see, but he had to - he got a good age certainly, but - he was in 
r
etirement like before - he died. Aye. And - and - it was - and he - it was - the icy roads - I can aye mind him speaking about the icy roads. You see, it's all downhill, for the - for the - for to - For Tinwalds father's farm, and - and the cottage was - 
w
hat they called the side, where we lived you see. And - and the road - the road down - in - for the - had to carry the coffin - down to the - to the hearse you see to get it with the horse. Get out in a - and - and - as - as we're going down - Tinwald it 
w
as steep you see, and had to hold on to the - the - the - this - all the sons was walking behind it - the coffin and hearse and they had to - it was - a friend of - of - of - that was driving the - the - the hearse. And - and he had to drive as slow as he
 cou}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 ld because it was slipp}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
y - a slippy roads, icy roads. And - and the - the sons held on with the - by the coffin - to sort of pull it back for the - for the sake of the horse you see. Keep the horse from falling down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your mother and father go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Tinwald - Tinwald parish church - like, but - but it - at Sanquhar it was the old church you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No matter where they were living they always went to church nearby somewhere?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, just - it was - the - the old parish church you 
see they went to there. Mother aye went - you see always to the Communions you see. But - when she could get out. My father - father - did - when he could get but it was - the sheep to Sundays and - and all, see Saturdays and Sundays.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When your mother had the gentry at Lochur?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She wouldn't be able to get away on a Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, they see - no, they could get away anything. Never left the place, she just worked away with them. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go to church with them when you were small?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Like - like - you - my father and my mother - mother took us to the church. Mother always took us to the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to get all dressed up for that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 One on each side yes. Aye, she was a wonderful mother. She got nearly e
ighty. She got nearly eighty, she - she died with us. I had her at Marchmount at the police houses. And - and - and looked after her, and she died there. She was nearly eighty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Despite her hard life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was she an easy sort of person to speak to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
My mother? Oh she - she could - she - I could speak to anybody she says. I - it didnae make any difference anybody coming into the house see you she would talk to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You got on well with her, if you were worried about anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she would - she was - she was good you know - sorting out things for us too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How about your father, was your father the sort of person that you could talk to a lot?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - it just depended what kind of mood he was in. Sometimes he - if things were going well with his - with the floc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9984110\charrsid5586003 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 , and - and - and that, he wasnae so bad, but there was other times he would kinda - ratty as the saying is.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But you had your mother there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mother. Mother was aye the best.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Who do you think had most influence in the way you were brought up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
The - the - mother I think was the best guide I think. Yes. Of course you see, in - in the - those days - the money - was only paid to them - in the six month. Every sixth month you see. My father had to
 do without his wages - for six months. You see. Before he got any.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Live on fresh air for six months?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, that's just it. But you see - the - the - the grocer that - the - McKie the the grocer - and and - he was a regular - man that was on, and
 he knew that and - and - she paid for what she could get and then she - if there was any left over - ah well it would just run over to the next week. Something like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And the grocer would know that at the end of the six months?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, that w
as all settled up, aye. All settled up you see because the - the bit lot of money came in then but you'd no - there were no rent or anything to pay you see. We - the shepherd's house was free. With - with - with his work, with the work. Oh he was - he was
 
- we - there - we'd a lot of good friends too and then - further down the road - further down the road there - the - there were - well - what's - they was called the orchard, what it was called the orchard, that was where the Crichtons of the orchard live
d
, it was like a wee - small holding they had, and - they were all grown up sons and one daughter - and - and she was grown up, that she helped - she helped her mother. Well, they had all their - own way of living too you see, and - and - well - as time we
nt on - we discovered that she was friends - wee bit far out but on mother side you see connected. Aye, and - and so that was - that was a neighbour, another neighbour living near. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your mother have much time to go out and about and visit people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, well - no unless - no - no unless there were an illness, she went if only there were ill or that or - went to see them and attend to them and help them. Down at the orchard. Crichton's was the name. And then they come up and visited us too yo
u see. Like that. Oh they were - they were a good help - they were good helping.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 If grown ups were talking were you allowed to join in when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 If they were what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 If they were talking, if grown ups were talking to each other were you allowed to speak?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No, we didna interfere. We didn't interfere when we were small, no. Just - just - they were all gathering - you know, just about their - their work chiefly. You know, about their - their hill work and - and one thing and 
another and that. It was what they were. But we joined - but we joined in when any of the wee sprees was on, we were all joining in you see the - when there was any -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were having a party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And then the - and then the singing and the playing. And then - a wee bit dance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did your mother and father think about swearing?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Swearing? Oh they - didnae - mother didnae swear. My father would. Used to when they were on the jills and that. But he wasnae a regular swearer like I mean 
- some of them - cannae speak but what they swear but he wasna like that, no. And the - and the boys and all that were brought up - with me, just the same and brought them up just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Would you have got into trouble if you'd been heard swearing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh I think we would have got a leathering.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you get a leathering for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I - it - it - it would - it - it would be if we were saying any - you know - just repeating anything that you shouldnae have said or something maybe like
 that. Like - the - or doing anything, like - wouldnae - we wasnae bad at - out like that we just sort of - kept peace if we could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Who was it that did the punishing in your house, was it your mother or your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh the - oh just get a - a - 
father - mother could give us a - a skelp you know too, if - if it wasna - if things wasnae suiting her like in telling us you know like - if we wasnae - paying any attention to what we should have been doing you know. As we was growing up you see. But sh
e - kept a hold of us as long as she could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She was a good mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Very good, she would - was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you play with anybody special when you stayed at Lochar?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, like the - it was just that you had the - the - the wee bits of sprees you
 know, just at the - when - whenever there was a clipping or anything like that, it always ended in a big spree and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Who all came to it, just all the shepherds from round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The shepherds, the shepherds you see. And then - some of their - t
he young - the young shepherds - if there were a lot of them - employed young shepherds, they - they were on the go too you see, they came in and - and - they were all players and singers a lot amongst them. And dancers, liked a bit dance. We just watched
 them you see, then, because we were just at the school you see. But -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were there any other schoolchildren near you to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, no, just at - just at the school, just at - Craigmoy school. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you just had your sister and your two cousins to play with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes, that's it, just - we - we - went when they were here. Of course the boys - the boys were - left the school you see, they werenae at the Craigmoy school. Just my sister and I.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How is your cousins come to stay with you in the first place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
My two cousins? Their - their - a sister of my father's - was the mother - were their mother. A sis - a sister of my - and she wasn't married you see, and - and - and the two - the two boys - she was working, she was out worki
ng - but - the - the two boys you see was left with the old people, the - that's - that's my grandfather and my grandmother, well - it was too much for - too much for my grandmother you see, to bring them forward you see, because she had - she'd her own f
a
mily too as well you see, some of the younger ones anyway, the younger family, they were all out working as they got forward you see. But - the - we just made our own fun you know and - and - and - in - in the winter nights especially I mean you - played 
maybe a - a - a game - a game at the cards, maybe - Old Miad or - or catch the tail or something like that you know just - for - and we used to get my father - if he - if he wasnae going out anywhere we used to get him in - interested init too you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He used to play with you sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. And mother and all took a hand sometimes. And then - the - Robert was a great one - for - you - you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 If your father wasn't going out somewhere he would take a hand at cards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, he'd take a - if he wasna going - well he never was out in the evenings much but -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  if he was working late - among}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  his sheep or anything like that you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But he didn't go out very much to enjoy himself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No unless it was - unless he was away at a sale or any
thing where they - with the sheep or cattle. Yes, you see - he had to be - forward at the marts and that you see to - see them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of games did you play when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you did have some company to play with.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well you - you - you know, just - hide and seek was one of them I think you know, and and just - sort of - tig you know, it was only a wee place, there wasnae much - wasnae man - many outdoor parts in it, it was just a - the - it would - the - the teac
her just lived as - at - at the - one of the endsof the school you see, this - yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So there wasn't much scope for games,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, there wasnae much scope you see, we had to - we had to have our scope walking towards the - the school - back and forwa
rd to the school, aye. Well the - the rest of them - had - you know, had long journeys too some of them, coming - coming over - get - some of them had to come over the hills you see, but then - they were - older than us lot again.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you wouldn't be able to join any youth organizations, you wouldn't be able to join any clubs or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no, we didnae join anything like - anything at all. You see just when you went - just - it was my sister - when - when you went up - Crawick Glen y
ou see, she - she joined in - into regular in the dressmaking. She was left the school then you see. She left the school before me, I went on 'til I was fifteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I think you said you had people to play with when you were up at Carco?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. There 
were - there were - family - the family across the - the closes you see, there was the - was the - was the foreman - ploughman's - daughters and that, when they were at the school, they went to the school, all went to school together down the three mile y
o
u see, and then - further up the road was the other shepherd, the other married shepherd and - and - and he had a son that wasnae at - wasnae - left the school, and he joined us too. He - got forward - in - in his life and he's - I - I don't know where he
 
lives now, where about Gretna or somewhere, but he got to be awful clever. Clever fellow he was. And - and he was on the police - he was on the police here too like in Dumfries. He was - he was on - for a while on - in traffic - traffic warden and that. O
h he was - and then - they were at my husband's funeral, I met him there again. Aye. You see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have sprees when you were at Carco?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, often. Often you know just - there was - always - you'd always wee parties you know, just amongst ourse
lf. And - and - visiting - visiting others - shepherds' houses and - they came to my mother's you see. They came to ours. And - then mother always made a big dumpling. It was a big dumpling and - and she'd cut it out and dished it on - in our - in our tea
, and the dumpling and - that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You seem to have had a good time even though you were out in the country?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh it was - it was fine, it was - you know that there were - there were nobody interfered - we - we had the room in the kitchen - but after 
it was repaired it was - it was big enough you know, it was good and then there was a wee bit - just - just near the door where - where it was - it was where the - the - the water - had to sit you know, we had to bring the water - round - there were a big
 boiler - round again at the byre you know, fresh running water you know into - and then mother - brought - brought some of her cans and brought them into - this wee bit at the door. She had them on shelves and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't have running water there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, not inside, we'd no - we'd no - nothing inside for - for - for convenience. It was just at this - there was this big - boiler. It kept this running water. It was coming from a spring, and it - and it was always running you see, so - so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So it would be nice and fresh?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh yes, we always got it - and then of course it had to do for the - for the - for - for the cattle as well you see, and - and - it - really for lots of things. See, this was handy at the byre. And then often after when 
they - tidied up the - the byre, she used to when - she used to clean the boiler out you see too - for - when she wasnae needing it for much, and - and - wash - wash out the - the pails, you know, wash out the byres, you know, the - after they were cleane
d down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just another of the jobs that she had to do. Did you ever have to help carrying the water?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Oh it wasnae - it wasnae far to carry the water, it was just at the - at the - the - the door, there were - like there was like two doors in t
he byre you see, and it was at that end, where the boiler was and it was quite handy you see to lift it out you see. And then she had - we had - the big house was in - in the close too, and - and you always - mother always kept the two pigs - two pigs and
 
fattened them up. My goodness, she did - she did - she was good to them, and - and she - you see she used to go into - when - when the garden - was good and - and she used to go into them and - they knew her you know they had - she was - she passed by the
 
- the pig house you see, to go into the - to this garden, and she just spoke if they were - if they werenae sleeping she - she would have spoke to them, and when she come back she threw some - cabbage blades or something like that - over into them you see
, she often was giving them something, you see, like that. She - fed them up you know that and she used to - when it comes to the parting of the ways she just felt it. She felt it you see. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You've got to be hard hearted about these things haven't you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, that's true, oh yes. But - but - you see the - as - as the years went on - it got more and more done with the butchers and butchers come up from Sanquhar into the field and - you know, and - and it was all over just in the shortest of noti
ce, you see, the old - the old ways, it was - it was - they had to - boil water you know and - and scrape them, you see, scrape the - the pigs after they were killed like. But - but they new method - was - the - they skinned them, you see, they - they - t
h
ey - the butchers from Sanquhar. So you see mother hadna - mother hadnae - it was just - it was just come - the - don't boil any water or anything for us Mrs Swan, he says, we'll - we'll have a - this old boy - and - in no time. And so they had. And then 
you see there was - I think there was three of them come, I - I - I think there was three like, there was - there was - Grays the butchers you see and he had - his assistants with him you see too. Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When they came did you want to see what they were doing or did you keep out of the way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well - we could see on the close like we could see through the door of course but we never - we never liked to see them - getting killed either you see. She was - she was working and feeding them and - keeping them clean and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were little did you ever get to any concerts?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Concerts in Sanquhar. If - if there were any - if there were any big concerts on in Sanquhar hall - when they - they had - they had a hall - any - I used to come down. Use
d to come down, there were - and there were sometimes - there were plays on, plays on you see. The - my father - we used to get my father to come but my sister and I used to go - down there. In that hall, it - it's -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did your mother not come?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, she kept the house and - when - and the dogs was what - she'd always a dog.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So she had to stay behind?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
She - and - and then - Robert, he wasnae away then, that's the - that was - the younger cousin. He went to Canada in - in - in - latter years. But - he used to stay - he used to stay with mother for company and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you got off with your father to the plays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. And - 'course we - it - it was a good bit to walk after the show was finished you see and that. And then he went to s
hows too you know, the - cattle shows you know. Went out to the cattle shows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What was it like going there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You see the - we had Thorn - we'd have Thornhill one - and - and then you would - we had a show in about Sanquhar too. But - the Thronhi
ll one you see - we had our - had a dog that - a collie dog at - at the sheepdog - show - showed the collie dog. But she was up - up for show, but she - she - she got third, she did fine. Collie.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they have to work with the sheep in the competitions?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no. It was just - aye, it was just - there for show you see. And then - could walked round and - and - and - see - with having the dog you see we got in for nothing you see, with having a dog at the show. And - and then - of course we - we tra
velled - I think we travelled - back - we must have got a lift back I think at that time. The whole lot of us. And the - they had - the - there was always - we were always meetings friends too at the show you see, and then - we got to - got - some tea or 
something like that before - before we finished up. Oh if it was a good day, it was quite a nice - turn out, really always a nice turn out at Thornhill.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they have entertainments at the shows in those days like they do now?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No - they - the
re - there were - there was - the Rood Fair here, you know, like the - the - there's the - well, the March Fair will be soon coming on you see and shows come in for that you know, the shows, the - the - but - and it's all about and - and - and you went up
 
to a - some - kind of show I think it was, and - at Thornhill, and then at night - there - there was a - a place where the - there was shows come in you know, just you know - for a time. But you got - we got - we got a lift back and forward with the motor
s or - wasnae so bad like - down to Dumfries. Of course I was grown up then you see. Bit older.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were at school did you get any pocket money or did you just get some money to spend if there was something special on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. Yes, we didnae get
 - get money to spend much you see - but - if we - had - had nae a big enough piece with us - mother - always got - mother always gave us something and then - she could buy - you could buy down shop, in shopping, something to eat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever get away for holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. Well - no, no unless it was just to see - our own people like - the - to - to visit our own - folk, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You went away occasionally to visit some relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, that's it you see. And - and - mother - mother would
 - they would travel down you see. Had to travel down - from Sanquhar you see, down to Dumfries - for to - to find out - mother's - mother's father - mother's mother and - and - down about Ruthwell. They were at Howthwaite Cottage, Ruthwell there, and - a
n
d then - then when - when she was a widow - she - they came - came to live at Carrutherstown Carrutherstown, that's at - aye, aye. So you see she - oh she was a big tall - fine looking woman, but - she - my - mother's mother. She had a hard life after her
 husband died. You see, he died -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go and stay with her when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, went often to see them like you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You'd just go down for the day would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Just used to go down for the day or that. 'Cos you could take
 the train once you got to Dumfries you could - we could take the train down you see, it wasnae that far and it wasnae that far, Carruthertown for the station, or for the - or for the Howthwaite - Howthwaite cottage where she was, it wasnae far to walk.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
visit any of your father's relations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
My father - my father - aye, they were at - they were at - they were at Tinwald you see, at Tinwald - you see, we had to come down - we had to come down to Dumfries - you see, and then - make out 
- make - make out to Tinwald - but - but no when - now when you was grown up you see, that was - that was - just on our school holidays or that and mother used to come with us, and visit them you see, visit the - the - the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just for the day again?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. See - aye, it's seeing who could get - things to shoot then, it was - well - it would have get left you know like I mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It's an easy enough journey by car but it would be a bit difficult going by public transport?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye there was no - aye, they werena the buses then you see, there werena the buses running then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Do you}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
ever remember your mother being ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She - she was - I can mind - mind her being ill, she was - she had a burnt foot. I can 
mind when we was at Lochar - she - but she didna lie up with it here but you see the - she had to get it - dressed and that, it was - it was a time - the time the - gentry was there, and - you know, the - this - this old cook, she was an awful kind body, 
I
 - she was Irish but she was awful kind, she awful good to mother. So they were boiling some potatoes - and - and somehow they - somehow or other it come against her foot and they were on the fire. And it - it - mother got it. Mother got it in her - on on
e of her feet. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 In a way she was lucky that the gentry were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, because they helped her you see, they helped her, brought the things to help her. To take the - the - the pain out. It was terrible. Oh - and - and then - they were luck
y with - with the young shepherd too 'cos - he could milk too, he could do a bit of milking you see, and it saved mother like for going out to the byres and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Everybody just helped a wee bit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, helped a wee bit, and - and let - and let her rest her leg you see - rest her leg. Because her foot was bad.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't have any relations near you, it was just friends that were round about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just we - just - just - just far out friends. I - and we were - we were connected we - there were
 a place they called the orchard - further down - further down the road, this was from Carco, down the road and I - and - her husband - it - it was the mother that was - that was connected with mother. And - and - Crichton was their name - but he was - th
e
y were a great big tall men, but they were drainers, you know, the - the - him and his sons, the - the father and the sons, they were drainers that took on contracts you know and all different contracts, and they were drainers. Aye they were clever - and 
awfully kind folk. And then they had a sort of wee bit holding too you see, amongst theirselves, worked away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you started to work you were fifteen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Fifteen. And - when - when I - when I went - the first time I went away from home, I went - i
nto a - I went away to help - with a shepherd's wife - you know - a shepherds wife too. But they were leaving - that was further up the road, away further up the road, a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 \endash }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  Coarse}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
bank shepherd. And he was - this quartered - he was leaving that place and he
 was going out - he was going over to the Lammermuirs - to - to - well they were connected - the - they were connected through other you see - where he was going, he was going to - what they call - called - called Caldercleugh, Cranshaws, Duns, Berwichshi
r
e - was - was the - aye, that was - and off I went with them you see I - I - I sort of - they wanted to - no - they wanted a - it was a wee bit help for - for Mrs Coultart you see, 'cos she wasnae too strong, but - it - it - he did a lot of work too you s
ee. He was a shepherd, aye. And - and - well I took - they were all sort of - neighbour farmers was - was all connected with them too.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you went away over to Duns did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And off I went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How long were you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh it was just for 
three month you see to be. It was just three month for the busiest time, you see, because you see he had to go - he had to leave the place - and - in - and go away to the sales, the big sales you know, and big shows and things too, and then - we had a - I
 was always company in the house for her and that you see, aye. And then the - the - the shepherd - he could do - if he was at home - Mr Coultart, he - he - he could do the milking of the cows too. And that, but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to do it if he wasn't there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. I - I couldnae get away with the milking somehow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother never managed to teach you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh I tried it ever so often but I never - I always say the - the - must be a - a - a }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 k}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 nack in it you know, so - so mother used to teach ones 
but - she - it just depended on the quietness of the cows too you see. You see - there - like there was short - short horns, like - like quiet - quiet cattle they were, and - and - and - Mrs Coultart and she's - she went in the filed with her - with her s
tool - away out into the field and - and - and - and - and went and milked there quite the thing in the street, quite the thing. It wasnae for the want of - of them being quiet you ken, they were quite a knack.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get paid for going to do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, yes, aye, just - was just - you know, a pound a month I took, just over - just - because I was - it was like - it was just like a home from home you see, they were shepherds. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And just helping your friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. But you see we had 
the busy - we had the busy times too you see because - we'd to keep - he had to keep up the hand - what you call the handlings. That was the - the - the dipping days and - and the clipping times, all the clipping times. Well he was out at other farms too,
 
well - some of them were his brothers, some of his brothers or brother-in-laws or something - see, so right round about Cranshaws you see, and - and that he was - and oh they were lovely - lovely hills too, beautiful heather hills. And - and - I loved the
 
hills you know because - they - there were as much - much white heather growing as what there were purple. It was lovely. Aye. I - I - I got a big bunch picked and - and sent it home. 'Cos we had nae heather hills you see. It was grass up at Carco you see
. But it was - oh it was grand.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you homesick when you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be your first time away from home was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - you know, just - you just sort of felt - away a big bit when once you got acquaint with the - with - 
a lot of young people about you -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You made friends there did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Made friends. Just - and then - and then you would always - always something to do you see, and then I baked - I baked for her too you see. I mean I could bake -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just sort of kept the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. I could bake for her you see, and make - and make food and that you see. So I just - we worked you know it was quite nice you know the - we went - then - then he went away to - see I had to go up to this - to the shepherds house
 to get away with - no - with the flitting. The flit - the flitting - they were away with the furniture and - and then of course we had to - to make - our way and stay in a - in a - a house overnight to be ready for the - the - the train - in the morning.
 You see. By Elvanfoot - Elvanfoot - Elvanfoot or somewhere. But got us there, because we were to go into Edinburgh - Edinburgh you see and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And get another train from there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - Coultart - had - had a - an uncle, was it an uncle or an aunt -
 she - and - and it was there - we stayed the night in Edinburgh, just - you know, because - just because the - the furniture forwarded - in - in place then, and - and the house and the dogs and all that. Just a flitting. Oh it was really - it was - of co
u
rse I was young you know, and the - the - there was some some - some of the - some of them come down with a cart - there. You know, like it was some of the neighbouring farmers you see, and - at - and so I got onto this cart and lifted up to the - the - t
o Mrs Courtart's you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You would never have so far away from home before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No, I just - just had to think about it, you know, just - you see - if I hadnae - and then Bessie of course you see was near there, my sister - and she was at the dr
essmaking and she was - always - home at - at - to - at nights for mother too you see. Aye, like it was - she wasnae solely left herself you see. So that -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you give your pay to your mother when you got home or did you spend it yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No.
 No, did - brought them some - brought something for them. Brought something for each of them - father and mother. Just a - and then - it was - oh I didna - I didna spend me three pound, I had a pound in the month, I didn't spend it, you see. Brought it h
ome. The -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And then you went to work in the laundry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Laundry. When I come back home - I never was away any further - for - for a while you see. Because I could help mother you see. 'Cos she had the - we - we had to have the - the clippings and th
ings you see - and I - the - mother - did the rolling of the wool, you know - rolling the wool you see is just about - she did that and there - there were clippers with him - we'd a clipping - with their shears then. 'Course it's all different now, the - 
aye clippers is all - all quick, done with speed, it's all speed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So your mother had to help with that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she helped them. She did all the clippings, she did the clippings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I don't know where she found all the energy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She ju
st - seemed to be - fit it in somehow for the job. She was - she was a country brought up to you see and - then you see - her - her father was a shepherd too you see, and - but he - it was - it was blood poisoning that took him away, because he - he got h
i
s knee hurt and - got his knee hurt in dipping. And then - somehow the dipping - the dipping or something got into it. And I remember - remember her when she used to tell me bits of things you know as - when they werena - when they were all together in - 
in - you know, in their young and what she did and that. In Durisdeer Durisdeer he - he was - I think he was at - I think he was at Gateslack or - at Durisdeer then, you know, the - her - her father and mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get the job at the laundry, did you apply for it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well - that was from - that was through - through the school - through the school you see. Aye, I was at the - the - it was through the school like if we wanted a - a - a -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they sort of tell the headmaster?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Th
e headmaster - aye, they - they - you see Mr Carson was the headmaster, and - and - and - they had put in - they put in for girls or - or }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  for}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
help for the office, it was for the office you see. Well - the - McKendrick - McKendrick was the name of the - t
he - the ones, well - they were friendly - with the McMillans you see too in Sanquhar - where they used to get a cup of tea - in dinner time at the school, if we didnae get a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 plate of soup we got some tea, and you took the pieces with us you see, and it wa
s grand and - and then you see - the - it was the same at the laundry time - I carried me piece, I could cycle then you see, and - and - and - I carried me piece and - the laundry I was - I - I did - I wasnae that long at the laundry. It wasnae work that 
s
uited me at all you see - I could get on all right - with the office, but then - they - the - the - the old man, he was the kind of head one - and he - they - he - he says - he expected you to take some - some of the machines after that, you know, the - d
oing the collar machines, you know, the - the collars - after their - to get them - dressed up, and - and the - the - the calen - colanders, the great big machines - for the - aye, for the sheets and things, or - or - or -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were expected to do that as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, well - I did - I did - I didna do it so you see, I said I need - you see, I needed to be away - and I needed to be away early, I couldna work late you see because I'd - that three mile to cycle ride when I was finished and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What were your hours officially?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh - oh I think it was - it was down for - I think it was down for nine in the morning I think and - and then we had our - our - our time for our dinner and that, dinner hour. And - and then you finished - we - we got 
finished - early. Some of them had to come away you see and there was some of them working overtime and - and the like of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Round about five or six that you finished at night then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, and - and if it was - wild - wild weather, well - was a
way earlier. Oh he did - he did well, he'd - he'd quite a good run with the laundry because I don't think they were - any thing like that now, I think it was all - done - changed through time as years went on into a creamery, into what you call a creamery
 or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were working out bills and making notes of what laundry came in were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
That - that was - you see - that was out of Sanquhar, down at that - at that road, where - where the laundry was like, it was out of Sanquhar. It's - oh it was a right enough job if - if -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How long did you stay there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh not very long. I wasnae very long there you see because I - I - I sort of left it, tried to get - get a different kind of job where I could make more money maybe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you not get paid very well at the laundry?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
We get pay - you ken paid well - in a way, but - I wasna earn - I had nothing much extra to work on, you know, so that - I did get a job - I did get a - a situation - but I had to come down into Dumfries th
en. To come into Dumfries you see for - I wanted always to - to - help my mother you see and then - would - would clothes to get you see, you know, we'd always our own clothes to get and that. At Sanahar, but - but there was good dressmakers in Sanquhar y
ou see and - good shops.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And your sister would be earning then, she'd be able to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, she - aye, she could help you see. She was well taught with a Miss Wilson, that was a dressmaker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So what sort of job did you do when you came down to Dumfries?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well it was more - just like sort of - housekeeping, you know, help - hel}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 
ping the mot - helping the mist}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ress. Helping the - the - the - the mistress I think. But but it - it the first - the first situation - was - it was a - house ta
ble maids - place at - that - that - that - there was like the cook - and I was like the house table maid, at - but - but I was still very young and I mean I wasnae that old you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How old would you be then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Seventeen I think. And - I mind wen
t to - I had to - you know, that - och I was a bit - a lot of grown - big - big sons too, they - it was a big family. The -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where was it}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  about}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 With Robinsons the solicitors. They were - they were solicitors and the sons you know in the office. 
They had offices. But this was - in - Beechcroft - at - it's - over in the Marpleton side really. It was over in the Marpleton side. But all - it has all changed, but - I used to have to come down - you know, and the - and the Post Office, there were no g
e
neral Post Office - near - it was in - it was on - Blue - Blue Street then, the General Post Office, and - and where I had to come down to - so goodness knows, I used to have to run for - for - my messages for them and and I - and I had to put my hair up 
then you see, I was - I had my hair up early, you see. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When did girls usually put their hair up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I don't know, they - sometimes they - they - they - were older like - the ladies, used to put them up a bit - my - I was always used to my down you see and hanging round the back, I had to screw it up at the back. And then - there was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was this because the mistress in the house wanted you to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No - no - no, I think it was just that - that was the way that the - there were so many - men
 about you know, you see, the sons - and - they were in offices and that and - and - and - they were all - well enough - off then and then Mrs Robinson - she was very nice too her but she - she was - sort of - and - rheumatics or something I think she had
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
a touch of rheumatism her - she was an elder lady, and a daughter, she had a daughter. And - she used to - her daughter used to help - to - she used to help us a big - a lot 'til she got married.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She worked alongside you in the house did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ay
e, she used to help with the beds, you know, the - there was some - a lot of bedrooms and then of course the - the - the - Maggie the cook you see she - she had more experience than I had and - and - and then she had - see to the food and - and then - thi
n
gs like that, she wasnae able to do messages, I got the messages to run and - I used to go away in - in my wrapper you know. Be out in a wrapper, and I ran to this Post Office on Leclue Street, it was in Leclue Street then, up the steps. And what it - wha
t
 - what it'll be - and I can aye mind that if - there werenae window and then - and - in the next door to that was - was a chemists shop, Turner the chemist was then - I can always remind of that, setting up the steps of the - and running to the Post Offi
ce, if I had to - if I'd to send a - if they'd to send a message away - or a telegram, I got the job to do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And you would have to help to clean the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. I would help, helped did it. And they got a - a woman in to do the washing still - lik
e - aye, aye, they werena sent out to the laundry or anything then. There was a woman come in and - and did - did the washing and - and - so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to serve the meals at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I didna wait the table so, I didna wait the table so muc
h but - I was - had - serving out the - the food, carrying it in and that. Aye - aye. Then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it a big house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It was a big house, aye, good big house, set up - set up in Victoria - Victoria Road, Victoria Road}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 it was. Oh I was good - I was there a good while with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did you have to sleep?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
In - in - oh had a - we had a bedroom - had to share the - share - like share the beds though. Aye, with the cook, aye. She belonged - she belonged to about Twynholm - Mag - Maggie Telfer. Aye. So - oh I think they're all away now. She -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have a sitting room to yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, just we - in - in about the kitchen, it was in mostly the kitchen if we'd to sit down. There was - a - a big range in the kit - hen and - and then th
ere was a back kitchen, and - and - where there - and - and - then there was a - a - a bit where there was - big tubs and that was where the washing was done and - certain reasons. Where we used to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What other rooms did they have, did they have like a sitting room?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Dining room and drawing room. Dining room and drawing room and then there was a sitting room near by. And then bedrooms up the stair. Aye, then the bathrooms. And all the - up the stairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You had a lot of work to keep clean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There was a lot of work. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they do a lot of entertaining, was Mrs Robinson the kind that had ladies coming in for the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, they - she did have - they did have a bit at home day - like - sometimes - bit of a - when it st
arted first they - they - they werenae entertaining an awful lot either. But - they did well for the - he was an elderly gentleman too, the - the - Mr Bobinson.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get on with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they nice people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you like the job compared to the laundry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
There - oh I - oh it was - better job like you see because - I mean - I - I - we were well fed and - and - and - and - comfortable beds and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to wear a uniform?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, you had a 
- you had - wrappers in the morning and - and - and a black - a black frock in the afternoon, and - white - starched aprons and - and a cap. And cap - and caps and that. And they were all special on of course you see, we had to come out in all that rigmar
ole. Oh dear. Waiting in that. Of course you see - they - they - they all - sons and that, they entertained a lot with their friends coming too at night, you know -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get on with all the boys in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh we never visit, just worked in amongst them. I never heeded them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did you have to call them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Presumably you would call Mr Robinson Sir did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, no - no, wasnae any of this sirs or any - they didn't ask us to do that. They - named them - Mr - Mr 
Fred or Mr Harry or what their - whatever their names was you know, just when you were speaking to them you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did they call you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh it was just Alice you see, I was Alice Swan you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They shortened your name to Alice did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Short - aye. Aye, Alice you see. I was Alice Swan. So - but - I just - that was what every - described on me - Alice. Alice you see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of person was Mrs Robinson, was she a kind that took an interest in the girls that were working there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh - oh yes, she was - she was very friendly, they were kind people you see. Is that - is that somebody? It was just a - they had just the one daughter they were all sons you see, and there were just the one daughter - but she - she was married, she wa
s a Mrs - she was going to be married just - about the time I left and - and she said, I thought you'd have stayed - to see me getting married, she says, you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was there a lot of preparations done, was it going to be done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, because they 
- because they went - they went to Laurieknowe church you see then you see the Robinsons, and - that was - of course where she was married, you see, she}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 s a Mrs - she was a Mrs Dykes, a Mrs James Dykes, she - she married a - a young - like Doctor Dykes but - that would be connected with the dentistry you know. He - he - he - Doctor Dykes -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He wasn't an ordinary doctor?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, that for - just for the teeth. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So would that be a big wedding then, did you ever hear about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It - it was
 - a good big wedding. The - they were - oh I don't know where they would have their reception, they would have it - they'd have a - a big - feast at home because it was a good big house Beechcroft you see, big self contained house you know, could go in -
 one way and right round.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There'd be a lot of work for you there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
There was a good lot of work - for - for us all you know, but I think it - when they were away on holiday and - and Maggie was away on holiday Maggie Telfer they called her, you se
e, I must managed myself for the whole thing. And - and I - I got on fine you see, you just seemed to find - I don't know, she was awful particular Maggie and she - when she found - she come back she knew she said - that I had been suing things that I sho
uldnae have been using and - and I left the range dirty and - because I had baked you see. I'd baked some scones for Mrs - Robinson, she - wheat - some wheaten scones, she was having the wheaten scones.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't have the washing to do there though did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh no, the - - didn't have the washing to do. The - they got a woman in - at different times to come in to help - pretty heavy washing. But it - it was pretty
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would be with a big family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you really like it working there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh I liked it you see but I - I just - I think I got homesick a bit a while to - to start anyway.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get homesick very often while you were working there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - I got a week - an odd weekend. And odd weekend you see, and I
 just sort of wanted to - that was the days of the train - the - Sanquhar station, there was a station then you see, so I could get a - a - a Dumfries station at - it took me up to Sanquhar station, and - and then - I - I knew where I was then and - I cou
ld walk up Crawick Glen but often met me, they mostly met me - if they knew I were coming they met me you see, oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But you didn't have regular time off, you didn't get time off every other weekend?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was the daughter of the house about the same age as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Oh she was older - she was older you see. But she - she was mostly at home you see. She was mostly. -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She didn't have a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, I don't think she ever had a job, she just - she was - she - she - there's a
 sister - I mean - of Mr Robinson's - lived in Terregles Street and she - she was supposed to be - going blind. She used to come up and see her - and when she - called her auntie you see, and - and I got always auntie - to take home at night you see. She 
was a great old soul, and - but - as soon as she got out in at the door now sit down, just you sit down and put your feet up. She said. She was awful kind. Kind to me. 'Cos it - it was what - you see, they wanted to see her home you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Make sure she got home safe?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, got home safe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And it wouldn't be}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 all that far?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It wasnae that far, coming down Laouriknowe Avenue you see and just turning in - to Terregles Street and she was just there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get on with Mrs Robinson? What sort of person was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well - the - the - the mother, like the missus - oh she was quite easy - easy to do, she was - she was a kindly person she was. Aye, she - she'd - she never - interfered with me in anything you see. She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did she do with her time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh she - she did - she wasna very - sometimes she wasnae very grand you know I think she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Her health wasn't very good?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she got took in for something - I don't know what really it was but she - there was - oh - a nurs
e came and - and sort of gave her - treatment in the house, just at different times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did she go out a lot or was she tied to the house?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, she would - they wore - they - they held - what you call - days, you know, name days, you know, for - fo
r - having their - visitors coming, you know, specially, holding the - the - well this is my day sort of style you know and - and they came all from the different houses, and then of course she would be back when it was her turn to go to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of people came to visit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well just the local - well, the - the - the - the ones that was - well they were - some of them was neighbours do - do you see, in Victoria - Victoria Road, and then - there was other ones - there was the - there was some of the Barbours - Barbours.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That's a shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, that's a shop kind, Barbours. And - and there was shortages too you see, the Shortages.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 At the laundry is that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, the laundry, you see they were well up - they were well up too up see
 the Shrtages, because they had - they had - a good business then you see that Mills is running - and that. And they used to come and - and then of course the - the - the young - the - the family, this - young - young sons - and then they were golfers too
 you see and and then they had their friends coming in at different times.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You would be kept busy then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye with the different - aye, we had to have a wee bit extra on - bit - bit extra meal you see for them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Mr Robinson wouldn't be at home when you had the at homes would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, he would just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That would just be for the ladies would it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It's just for the ladies, afternoon tea and - and - and that, they - no, they were - he had his office, Mr Robinson - Robinson, and then yo
u see his sons were - in - in solicitors offices too I think. I think there was - I think there would be - I think the eldest son if I can mind right, was in his office, was in the father's office, and then - the other ones - there was other - other two -
 and there was one, a - Charlie - Charlie they called him, he - I don't remember him you see, he was away, but he was away abroad in \{BLANK\} So he - oh they were dis - you know, they just sort of married }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 through-}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 hither through times you know, the - people that they knew you see too, were friendly. Yes. That's right, yes, that's right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they do any entertaining at night when Mr Robinson was there, did they have dinner parties at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, no really, no they were - it was just I think befor
e - before - Elsie they called her got married you see, Miss Elsie. She was - fair - fair hair, she had fair skin.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 A pretty girl?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she was quite nice and - and - and high colour, she had always a high colour. 'Cos - so ex - just a wee bit ex
tra meal you know if - they gathered any in and - and Doctor Dykes was - coming too you see, always there you see. And it had to be - had to attend to him you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about when you got some time off, did you get off at nights there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, like 
- I did - well a day off if we want it, you see, or going out a turn but - I - I didnae bother going very far you see because - I - I used an odd time - went to some friends you know, at - just - at nights you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You just went visiting friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, just like - you got to know by being at the church maybe or something like that you see. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You kept going to the church regularly when you came to Dumfries did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, we used to go to - evening services mostly it was you see because you were sort of free then you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it Laurieknowe you went to as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh yes, but - there was two you see, there was - that was the - what you'd call the old church Laurieknowe and it was - it was a Revered Mr Slesser then, it - th
at was the minister. And then - just - just further - just further down - near the - near the bottom - was the - Mr - it's Mr Simmons's now - but he was - it was a different - minister then of course, but - Mr Simmons's, it was more of a Free Church - Fre
e - what they called a Free Church. It was very nice so we - used to go there of an evening to you see because - hear the preach - hear the different preachers. But - hymn books was different you see, the hymn - yes, being a Free Church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go out with the cook to these things or did you have other friends that you went with?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh sometimes - sometimes we went together, Maggie and that, but - but then - and - and other times you - were just - maybe didna have the same night off or that. She we
nt to - have her own friends. Of course she had more experience in - in - in - that kind of work because I was just seventeen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you find it a bit lonely then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Being in the town having lived in the country all your life?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No - no
 too lonely, but - I think it was I just homesick or something, I got homesick But - there - there were some - there some - some of the McMillans - well - they were far out connections of my father's.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Is that the ones that you used to get your dinner with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, in - yes, well this was a brother, this - this John McMillan - was a brother of the ones that was the clogger in Sanquhar - so - he used to meet - he was a tailor too for them, he was the tailor for the - for Mr Robinson, and his sons, and - and -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you would be able to go and visit them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was - down the road. They were just above - used to be Chickens the bakers, it's away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So the McMillans stayed near the bakers did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, they - that - that was a - above ch
ickens, they - they lived - on the flat above chickens the bakers, so they were fine and handy for - for going or anything. But the - they didnae - I mean they didnae have the - the - the cottage loafs or anything that - you wanted.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you manage to make any friends apart from the girl you worked with and the McMillans?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
The - well there were - just - it would be through the church you see, the - they were - friends that you - through met anyway do you see and went to their house, like when you w
ent to their house like it was often the Sunday night, after the church, after we'd been to church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You would go home with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Went to their house. But it was never very far and wasnae out of the town or anything that way.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever go to dances or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, then - no then, but - as - as I got on - as I got on I got - tea - I got - Mary Carter, she's off - of course they're all away now but they Carters were all musical - musical family. And Mary Carter was the one 
that was the teacher, teaching you to dance and - and - and then we went to her classes. But however - I was - I left - I was a wee while away from Dumfries - and then you see I helped our father - I helped my mother when - when - when I was - when she - 
my father wasnae needing me you see, with - with the cattle and one thing and another and - but my father - you see he had busy time every year, the lambing time and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 hewing}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 , and then if he was - and then when it comes on for the - the clipping time he was away at clippings too you see. They had - but - but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you come back to work in Dumfries after you'd been home for a while?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Came down to - there was a Mrs - there a Miss Lot - she - the - the house, it was Crawford Villa was the name of t
he place, it's - it's - it's no very far off - off St Michaels church manse. This is is - it was - there were two - it was a - a semi-detached villa, you know - there was - there was - she was Miss Watt and she just wanted - someone to help her like. See,
 and stay in the house with her. 'Cos she had her father and mother and they were elderly you see then. Mr Watt died when - while I was there with them. I was there a good wee while with them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 More than a year?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes. And then - we got - you kno
w, when you finished and the - it was kind of heavy place too, sometimes you got help in, but it - it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to do the cooking there too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, it was just - help in the - in the - in the kitchen and - and - oh she - she did odd jobs 
too, Miss Watt you see, but she was a - her mother was a sort of invalid too. She was elderly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She would have to spend a lot of her time looking after them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, yes, looking after her, and then of course Mr Watt - he - he - he was a retired gen
tleman you see but he - he - he was elderly, but - he -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of job had he been doing before?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh I think it would be - in - in - solicitors work or something. He was in some big shop - big - business or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 An office or something?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes, like - because - he retired and - and then they were - they were sons - there - there was one - there was one a doctor, he was away - Doctor Watt, he was away, and his wife wasnae very strong either. And - and then there was another son - so
n - he was abroad - in some hot country, but he come - he come home once while I was there, and you know, he had - he had to shift his - his - boots - do you know what pile of boots you had to clean for him, and one day - you know, aye, he kept changing h
is boots. I don't know what it would be - whether it would be him coming from the hot country or no I don't know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He had bother with his feet?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Something must have been for you see to - and - he particularly wanted them cleaned you know, shiny. He just -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was one of your jobs was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That's one of my jobs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it a big house to keep, it wouldn't be as big as Beechcroft was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no, it wasnae as big as Beechcroft bu there was - there was - there was the big room down the
 stair and - and - and the big bedroom - upstairs like, it was up that direction, it was up a stair, and - and there were attic - there - there were - an attic - they would be attic rooms now likely for it's been all changed you see, I often have a look a
long where I used to - tread about you know, coming off the road. Of course it's all changed you know - with buildings you know and different houses and that, and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Where did you sleep about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I - I - had a wee - I - I had a wee attic room - a wee
 attic room. Just with a skylight window. It was - it was then like - with - but I think it's - it's through time - I think through time they would get it made different you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Bigger window put in or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 After the - after the - mother 
died. After the mother died I think Miss Watt would go away you see with - to some of them of rest of them you know, her brothers and that. But I used to - when my free time was - there was a garden at the back and I used to go out and cut the grass you k
now, just like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to do that or did you just do it because you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes - it was - it was a just wee - a wee bit turn in the fresh air you know, that - outside.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to do the washing for them as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No
. They - she - they were mostly - a woman come in where - if there were any extra ones in the washing, but - we - we didn't have from washing to do, you see, that they - there was a sort of - I think a machine set in the - in the - in the entry, just a - 
t
here was a like the back door and then there was a front door. But this - oh and then there was another room that they called the drawing room, you see that was where they had - had a wee - any bit extra teas or anything. They - they - they'd that all - f
i
xed up, but it - just as you'd come in at the door there was a wee bit - there was a bit - a passage, and - Miss Watt had a bicycle and - she used to go cycling out for messages and that - and - bringing in the - ex - extra goods and that, ordering things
.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't have to do the shopping there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no, no - not - extra like for - I - maybe a message down at - there - there was like - it is a Post Office yet but it - it was - used to go down you called it McQuinnies Corner. It was - down - the 
Crawford Villa - Villa, it comes down you see, it was rising up onto a - and you see it sitting, the two big houses course it' all - it's all different now you see and have these big - attic windows in - where they - where the wee - skylights - proper win
d
ows you know. But - oh we got on fine she did - didnae want me to leave but I said I'd - I - I would - I would have to leave - to leave - for - to help - at home you see. 'Cos my sister - well she - she was at the dressmaking. She was at the dressmaking i
n
 - in - in - and mother want - wanted to let her get all the - the time that she could in Sanquhar for the dressmaking you see, because - when she had her time in for the dressmaking - she went into - into farmhouse service, my sister. She did - she - aye
, no long since like she just died - I - I - I - and just past September, she - she died late last - in 19 -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That's interesting that she went into service after she'd served her time as a dressmaker.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye. She -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Could she not get a job as a dressmaker then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no, she wasnae going in for dressmaking. She just wanted to - to - and she - she bought a - a sewing machine, Singer sewing machine, and - and she - and she did lots of - she made lots of things for mother you know and just -
 and - and her - and run up the - run up the curtains and one things and another and - made our aprons and - she - lots of things, it was a great helper. But she - she wanted to - to get a wee bit money you see, I mean she - she wanted to make a wee bit m
o
ney and she went into the - the farm, she went into the farm houses, there was a - at Crawick hGlen there was - a - further on, past Carco - there was - you went right on - to Corsebank, what they call Corse - a big house at - at Corsebank - Sandilands wa
s the name, Sandilands. And - and she got on there with the housekeeper, there was a housekeeper, and her - she got on fine with them and she -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That would be quite handy for her, being quite near home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, and then she had her bicycle you see a
nd she could - cycle down the town and - and - back up again. Oh it was - it was - it was very handy, and she like - she - liked the housekeeper and - and they were all - and they - they were awful fond of our Bessie, they said - she - she could make a gr
a
nd cup of tea. She - she - so she - oh they were a lot of her, she did awful well at Corsebank. And - and - the minister for Sanquhar - the old - the old parish church - at Sanquhar was the Reverend Mr Wood then, he was a big stout man, big stout gentlema
n
. That he often - he often got a lift up - he - he visited - up at mother's too, when he'd to go - and he filled - filled the chair when he come in, he's a big stout man you see he filled the chair. You see, mother used to - go to the - to the communions 
you see. They - walk - walk down, aye. The - the Crichton - the Crichtons from the Orchard you see were the same church too, and she used to get a company down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your father didn't go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, he didnae go there, he just - he - he - he'd - he wasnae really a church man you see, but he - he was - he had his hill to}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 look after too you see, and his sheep was first.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He would be tied to that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, his sheep was the first down here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go to the church when you were working at Crawford Villa then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did I go to church, that's where I joined the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Which one did you go to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
The - St Michaels. St Michaels just through there. And that was - 1913. m 1913 I was - I was with Miss - Miss Watt at Crawford Villa, and it was thei
r church too you see but she was often out in the morning you see. But I said I - I - I must join the - I - I would like to join the church, and - so - I had the classes to go to you see for joining the church.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So she let you get time off to go to them did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh yes, because - they were friendly with the - with the Reverend Mr Campbell and his - and his wife you see. Aye. They were - they - they werena very far over to them you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they religious sort of people, did they have prayers in the house or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, they never - there never was anything - in - in - at any of those situations, no. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they nice people to work for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were - they were quite nice, they were very nice to me anyway y
ou know just like - I was there by myself, there was no other - there were no other maids or anything. But I got on all right with her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were still quite young then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they sort of take an interest in what you were doing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ay
e, this was - I was seventeen - seventeen when I joined the church, and - that was 1913 - April - 1913 was my first communion and it was at St Michaels church - 'cos the Reverend Mr Campbell was the minister you see when he was there, but - you had -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That sixty years next month.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. So we had a - we had the - you know, the preparatory services, and then - we was all introduced to the elders you see. We all to shake - shake hands with the elders, - and then of course I had to come forward - to th
e communion - on - on the - you see, there'd be the two communions you see. Like Miss Watt you see would be out in the morning communion, and I - so - so - in the afternoon communion they - we got away out for the communion. So it - I was quite pleased to
 - to - was accepted then, so I - went to the evening services. Went to the evening services a lot after that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What else did you do with your spare time then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They - oh went out - went out a bit walks sometimes to the - you know - for - we - with
 - some other girlfriends. It had - made over in Maxwelltown, the Pattersons, they - used to go their house whiles, and then - we used to - go out for a bit walk you know - like - if it was - nice - if it was nice and dry. And that was the days when - whe
n
 there were - few days when the sun - was covered with shows, for - you know, from top to bottom, you know, the fair - the fair time. There was - there was a Rood fair time and there was the - the March fair time, but you could get the whole week then, bu
t you see now they get about three days now I think. You see. Aye.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It's just a couple of days for the March fair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, I think so, the - and about three days or so for - the September fair.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you used to go to the fair did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 We went there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get time}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 off specially to go to the fair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh I did, it's afternoon - afternoon sometimes. But - it was - it was awful crush. An awful crowd then you can mind - could hardly get through. We could hardly make our way through them
. Just - people come in different - they used to look forward to the - that - fairs, and then there was - a lot of the hiring then with the fairs then too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was the farm workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, and on the streets you know and - that sort of thing. You know. That's a long time back now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But you enjoyed the fairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Enjoyed the fairs. And we used to have a go at the - at the Aunt Sallies you know. Good - goes at the Aunt Sallies. See if we could get a monkey or something like that you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you always just go with girl friends or did you have any boy friends when you were that age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh - odd bits of - oh boyfriends a - an odd time. An odd time but they - they never - I mean to say they - they were just sort of - friends that - 
with - with - with the Pattersons you know, used to see - they had sons too and - used to have a wee bit walk out with them too.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But they were just friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Just friends.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You weren't courting seriously?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No. And then - my cousin - 
my cousin John that was brought up with us, he - he was at - Australia, he went to Australia you see and - and - he was home - he was home a - a - on - oh it was the first world war started, and he - and he - he came over with the - expeditionary force, A
ustralian - expeditionary force - and he came to - Crawick - Crawford Villa to see us too you see, and I mind making him his tea.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were allowed to have visitors like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, so I said to Miss Watt that he - who he was like and he was a 
- from - Australia you see. And she said, he'll have to have a cup of tea. So he was quite pleased with his entertainment, and then - and then my father and mother were still at Carco then too you see, and so he was going up to visit them. You see, with h
im coming over with the - with the Australian Expeditionary Force, they got - they got so long leave to - visit their friends - before they went into - into action you see, that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How long did you stay at Crawford Villa then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh I was a good wee while at Crawford Villa.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you there 'til you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, no. No, I come - I got married from - from Tinwald, like I got married at Tinwald church. No, the - it was - oh I would be about three years with them I think, I think I would be y
ou know just about - but - oh they just - just wanted us to stay or - or - or - go home for a bit holiday then come back you see, but - I just wanted to - I felt that I wanted to be nearer home. And then I would - and then they - Bessie was - was shift - 
s
he shifted about too you see - with - she come out of - out of the Crawick Glen - and - and she had a - she took a - a situation with - with the Dickies, the Dickies of the Tower, Dickies - Dickies was their name, they're farmers. Still the farm kitchens 
again too you see, but she - she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was that near Sanquhar too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
That's Sanquhar aye, aye, Dickies of the Tower. And then - Dickies father - Dick - Dickies - mother - mother and sister - they - had a farm - further down - Dickies at the Towers farm set up - I remember once we were cyc}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid12147710\charrsid5586003 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
ing - to see my sister when she was there. And - I had such a lot to say to her that she - Mrs Dickie said - an awful body, she talks you see. I had an awful lot to say to her, because I hadnae seen her for a long time
, and I was just - however - Bessie made us a cup of tea and away I went, I said, oh I'm no staying here long. And - and - and - with Bessie fidgeting awful well with them because - she was - fond of that - in the - and the work you know and she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She was at home with the farm work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she could - she could turn in and milk cows or anything like that you see too. She -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Better than you at the cows was she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh aye. I - I couldna get on with the milking at all. Used to - try it once or twice but -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you like working in the town then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - I did - I just seemed to work - I just}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 eemed to wanted to be in the - in the town somehow. Like inside work you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You felt happier there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, like - she had - Bessie of c
ourse is - she had - when it come near the time for my father - you see, when - when he took - you see - at the big clippings and things like that you see mother had to - had to - row the wool, the - you know it was all done with the shears then, the clip
p
ers you ken, and - and - be big bags hanging up you know to fill - with the fleeces in, and she wore a - she had a fleect - or a fleece and she was - she was one of them that was - rowing up the wool. Goodness knows when I look back and think I see her - 
she - she was - she - like a young body and she wasnae you see, you see she was getting on for - middle age then you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She could turn her hand to anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She - she could - she - she had to start - work whenever her father died you see, when 
ever her father died she - she - there was a - it was a big family of them you see. So - she went out - she went - she went on with it to help - help her mother. She was - she - oh she was a hard worker, and just seemed to - fit in, she just seemed to fit
 in with everything, you know, this - in life somehow as I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But she enjoyed her life too?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And they had their parties that you talked about?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh yes, she - oh yes, she enjoyed her life. She - she liked it - she liked her fun. You k
now - just - this now - so very long ago, that was before I took the - the - the chill and that with the - with the house have in - in - Grayson Avenue, it was a top flat, like I happened to be out - at the - at the gate. I don't know now what I was waiti
n
g on, but there was a - a fellow jumped off his bicycle, he says, and - he says, you'll no - you'll no know me he says, Mrs Sharp, but he says, I know you and I remember your mother, she was an awful cheery body, he said. They were Tinwald folk, he had hi
s father was in - it was Wilson they called him. Scott Wilson. So - so -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Your mother was well known and well liked?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was well liked, aye. She was awful well liked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were either your mother or your father interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They - oh they were - they go to vote and one thing and another, aye.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Who would they vote for do you think? What were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - Liberals in that days, Liberals - aye, they - they - they were mostly Liberals you see, the - that - they were taking a kind
 of lead in that - at that time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What about you when you were old enough?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh it - I was - just - had to go with the - go - go with the ones that was - sort of serve with you know - I - I think so, to - to - help them or something that way. You know, in the - it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You mean they actually said to you how they should vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You just did it anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I just - just had to sort of go - go with - go with them you see, yes. 'Cos they liked you to - be the same, they wouldnae
 have liked you to be different you know with the - all had their own - but old Mrs - Miss Watt entertained a good bit too after - after the father died, and - and - and her brothers - used to come, and she had a sister - that - that was married on a Mini
s
ter, and they used to come and stay you see, and then - then there was always a wee bit extra on - then. Aye. Aye. In the house. But I - I got - a wee bit help from her then. And then - the - the - Mrs - Gould - Mrs Gould or something they called her, if 
e
ver Mr Gould I think was the name of the minister but they came for - for - Eastburn I think, Eastburn I think you see, and - and they stayed their holidays and - and she'd two daughters, and they liked to be coming in and - and - helping me in the kitche
n.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you get on with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - oh fine. Fine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were just young were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, they were just young. And then - the - their mother - the mother helped too a wee bit with the cooking, used to have extra then.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It's not so bad if there was extra work to be done and they were willing to help with it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No. No. Well I hadnae the experience for to stop them you know what I mean. I did never interfere with any of them you see, coming and going in the kitchen or ocht like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did Miss Watt sort of let you get on with the work yourself or did she come and tell you what she wanted done?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - it - it was just - oh she sort of - aye, in the - in the mornings you know, in the forenoon - she - she was mostly - helpi
ng you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She would be working about with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Aye. And then I had the - had the bed - the bedrooms to do you know and that and a wee bit extra when it was cleaning time you see, there was always some}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 boy - she did have a - a woman that come in too to help, and if she was going to be away anywhere - there was a woman came in to - to sort of help us you see and - and see that - things was going all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Do you remember what kind of pay you got there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh it was - I don't - don'
t know whether it was two pound a month or - or how it wrocht in, something like that, I know - it - it - the wages wasnae high but - I mean I - I was well fed so - and had a good comfortable bed and everything you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were well fed there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, they did - liked their food.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you well fed at the Robinsons?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Oh aye, they were good, they liked their food, the whole lot of them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You just got the same food as the family did you
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Aye, well - after we attended to th
em first and then after - we could sit down to a bite you see. Mag - Maggie and me - oh it was - two or three courses at the dinner.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You talked about the gentry and yourselves?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh that was - that was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 That was when you were very young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
At Lochur, aye, they were the gentry. Oh they had their own places and they brought their own maids - brought their own maids with them and their cooks and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What would you say was the main difference between them and you though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh well
 - it was just a case that - they were from the English side you see, and - and - they - their - their friends - it was the shooting season that - that was the busy time you see. The - the old gentleman that took over - was a Mr Hepburn. Because it was - 
it - it was his - relations, relatives came through and - and - Pitlochry was - Hignets and - and - and - and - all the different - and then - Mrs Hepburn had - had her friends too you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you feel that they were very much different from you though?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, they didnae make any difference at all. No, they just mixed in with - but - but Mary - Mary the cook as you call her, she - they made their own bed - their own bread. Aye. And - with the - with the peat fires you see, and - and - Mary - Mary -
 made the - the bread, and mother - mother - when she was kind of free handed she - she helped her and - and - and picked up the -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you came to work in the town, you were working for -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Miss Watt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they gentry as well, the Robinsons and the Watts would you say?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well no, they were just - they were - they were in the offices you see and you had to sort of look up to them too you see because they - they had their - their offices you see, and then the house was their own - the - Bee
chcroft was their own like you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You felt that they were a bit better than you did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Ah well of course we - was just the maids you see. I was just a maid, the house table maid you see and - and my - Maggie was the cook you see. But I - I - that was just my first experience, and - in a town. That was my first experience you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you feel there was a big difference between the working people and the business people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - you know they - they used to - oh they were good too at 
letting us out - we got out to - used to sort - sort of out and away to the - away to the fair and - one thing and the other.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But the likes of the Robinsons wouldn't go to the fair would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - I don't know whether they went to the - they -
 they would - they'd walk through them like we had but I mean they didn't - aye, you see that was the days that the - that there was so many of them, so many of they shows in and - and that. They all got through. Oh they sort of patronized them you see. B
ut it's all different, it's different now you see, the - they don't get so long now. They - they - they - they don't, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you work anywhere else after that before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. I - I - I left - Miss Watts and went away back up to Craw
ick Glen again to my mother - help my mother and my father. But - I got a - a - a - I took a job just temporary - for - at a farm - at a farmhouse because they had nae - they hadnae anyone for to help the - the cook when they - when they're baking and tha
t, they were - they - they - Mr Dalgleish - and his sons you see was there, he wasa widower, but - he - he was connected with the - with the Dickies too you see, and that's it - I went to them - I - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was that quite near your own home then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye
, well I had to cycle you see that was a wee bit - that - that was - down - the - the - you - Loch - the - the Euchan Road, the - you know, there was a - a road - cut off - the main road, and - and it was down there - where this farm was. Ulizie - Ulziesi
de, but on the way from there now you see the - family grew up and they scattered and then they lost a son - during the first world war, he was in the - in the - armoured car}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 as}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  or something you see. Their eldest son. So -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't stay there in the house for that, you just cycled back and forward to your work did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, I stayed - I stayed her - the time you see, just to help them 'til they got a - another - another girl - woman that could stay in, could - could be - back there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You didn't live in the house though did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
I - I stayed at night in the house, oh yes. Aye, because I had to be there - for the - making the food in the morning, getting the - the lads out you see. Big growing lads.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were a housekeeper really there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, yes, baking just for a - a - a short time, I don't know whether - I managed for three month or no, I think I did - I think maybe I did you see but - it was awful difficult for to get the - the - the - the kind of - woman that they wanted, bec
ause she - they wanted one that could - could bake and - and wash and - and - and - and do all that sort of thing.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Somebody that would be a wife without -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Aye. And always tend to them. But I went home after - I went - I - I - they did come
 for me - I - I was twice there I think. They - they come for me - they - I don't know whether they made her run away or no or something but - they - they were without any help anyway, so I said I would just come like - just - you know for a short time, a
n
d - and he - he came up for me in the days that - that was the days of the pony and traps, you know, the - he hadnae his motor then and - but - they did get a lot of - we did get a motor - before I left one of the times. Oh they were quite nice, quite nic
e to - to serve for but I mean to say you needed to be strong to - to stick in and work for them, work. But I didna take on any milking or - or anything like that, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But you enjoyed working there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, I did - did baking - baked -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they friends of your before you went to work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes, we knew them like, we knew - we knew - we knew who they were like, they - the - the Dalgleishes, and - and then you see - my sister - was with - Mrs Dickie at the Tower was a - was a daughter, she
 was a daughter, a married daughter. Aye. You see. She was a mar - she was a married daughter you see, so that - we just - had her down sometimes you know just for a wee turn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get much time off when you worked there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, no, we didna
e get much timeoff. Maybe just a - maybe just a - a - a run in to Sanqhuar you know just - into Sanquhar maybe - if we'd any messages to do or that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Then after that you went back to live with your mother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I went - help - help again. Help again y
ou see because it was coming near the - the - the busy time again you see, any of the busy times - she needed a wee bit help you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She would be getting on a bit by then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, she was. She was getting busy you see, but - see the - and then you
 see, when my father - my father took the ill turn - she had to - look after him too you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When was it that your folk moved to Tinwald then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They - when we moved down to Tinwald - that was at - at - at - that was like - after - there was a s
ister of my father's had this holding - this small holding at Tinwald, but she - she was wanting to give it up because she was too - too old you see, and - and - and she - she lost her son - it - it was - he was - work - working in Dumfries at an ironmong
e
rs shop and that but he wasnae awful strong either, but they're - they are buried in Tinwald with - with the two of them, aye, so we got - she - she wanted - my father to get that hold - get the holding, you see, aye, to - yes, to - keep it you see, it be
l
onged to - Jordons - Jordons of the Jordon Hall - was - was the head - head of them, you know, and then - he had a - he had a solicitor - working for him and - and - you know, mother had to - mother rented it you see, and - she had to go into the County H
o
tel - at the time when her rent was due and - and meet this solicitor - for to pay the rent. But it was - the only snag it was - the - it - it was just a room and kitchen too you see, a wee back kitchen at - at the - open - opened the door - opened the do
o
r and there was a wee back kitchen. A room and a kitchen, and - the - there was the byre, the byre was at the end - at the end of the house, and it was like - aye, whitewashed cottage with a thatched roof, thatched roof. It could be very nice you see when
 
they - when - when they started first there - they - they could work and they had a - they had a man - and - on the go that used to come and do the thatching, you know, if there was any holes or anything like that he - they - they come along and sort of t
a
ke - make it all secure, and - and - put it fresh, and - and sort of - trimmed it all round about the borders and that. Oh and as time went on mother - mother looked after it you see. The - the only snag was - that the fields - the - the fields were like 
away from the house, there was fields you see - attached to it, and - and - that was the only thing, there was just one wee field - that was kind of near. And - and - mother used to - use if for - putting the cow out}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 in it at nights, she still had her cow s
ee. And - and - and then she reared up the - the calves or - or maybe two stucks and that, and then she was taking the - the - the stucks into the market at Dumfries you see, when they - when they were big enough for sale you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did you do to help her there, did you work in the house or did you help with the cattle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
No, I tidied - I tidied up a wee bit you see and - and then - round in the fields you see - of course there were - obliged to the - some of the farmers for to do the ploughing 
and a wee bit, there was a wee bit - like for potatoes and a wee bit for turnips, and - and - and then was a - another field - that had - had corn you know, like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And the farmers round about helped?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, they came and helped you see, and th
en - my father - we - had have given them a day maybe - a day at - at some of the corn or something like that for doing his own.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So they all helped each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. It was fairly good, the - farmers was very good and kind to us. And then of cou
rse, the - I knew the Swans you see, well they were - they were father - my father's names was Edward Swan.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Coming from that part originally?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes, so they - so they sort of - were - was quite all right to be the - my mother got on fine and her h
ealth - kept wonderfully good. And - and she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What was life like for you when you were living at home there? Did you get out very much at nights?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No. No, but after I finished the - the - after - after I stopped at - after I stopped at Ulzie
side - farm - I got into Sanquhar to a Mrs Tweddle, a Mrs Tweddle. You - Mr and Mrs Tweddle, but he was a retired gentleman, and - and she was a Waugh, Waugh the grocer. There was Waugh the grocer, and - and she was - her father was Provost - was Provost 
once in Sanquhar you see, Provost Waugh, and - but - he was elderly and he - he was ready to retire too, but he had sons that could - keep on the shop. But -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What did Mr Tweddle do before he retired?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh he was - he was a business gentleman you know and - and - had shares - in the railways and - and - this kind of things, but he was -

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He was quite well off was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He was well off. He was - he had his family - Miss - this Miss Waugh - she - she was like his second wife. The - the - but he
 - his first wife - die - and then the family - they were all scattered about, and some of the fam - most of the family was married and they coul - and they come - and - and stayed with them - at certain times of the year you see, made - visit - visiting 
h
er. And then the young - the young daughter, she was - she - she was married - on a banker, she - she - like while the time I was there, she was married with a banker. At least he was coming to - to be the banker, at - at - Royal Bank in Sanquhar I think 
it is -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did they have other staff as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were the only one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Just only the one, just helping - helping Mrs Tweddle you see. She was - oh she worked and all you see. Did work like that. So it was quite a good place and then there was - she - she got a - a woman in to do some washing whiles and - and that. The -

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you do baking and so on there or did she do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, did baking, I would - I did baking and - and - and she - and helped her with the cooking and - s
uchlike. So - there was - oh there - it wasnae - they didna keep much company but - odd days - there were - people coming in and then - Mr Tweddle was a golf - good at golfing, he went out to golf and - times he would have brought some of the men for tea 
you know and - and - and he had - and - and another thing there was the bowling, the green bowling. Aye, he was - he went - were never free, he was never free.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He always kept busy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. That was - that was the days when the - when Sanquhar - had 
a station, you see, Sanquhar had a station, but through time they did away with that station you see, and they altered other things. It was an awful walk mind you, because you - you'd get the - get the train at wanquhar and - and - and down to Dumfries qu
ite easy. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you come down quite often when you were a young lassie working there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Like - like - aye, like - like Mrs Tweddle's - aye, oh it was still - no - no so far to - well I did - they flitted from - they flit - I was with the 
Tweddles when my father and mother flitted to Carco you see. Then - and - they done flitting and go - got away, and I was wanting to clear away too you see because - I - I knew well enough that mother would - need some help, but - however she said - she s
a
id, don't leave without giving a notice you see. So I - gave a month's notice and - and - and worked the month do you see, so as when I - I got back down - to Tinwald, that was me finished with the - with the - you know, with service like as they saying i
s, and - and I helped my mother - just with all the bits of things that was to do, and - and had the - the water - the water supply was - from a well - you know, from the wells.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have to pump it up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 There was a - there was a burn - went ri
ght - right down by - oh it used to get pretty heavy sometimes, but it was in - in through the - in off this burn - there was a well, spring water, and - and there was a - a big plank that was put over - like a plank, and that was where you had to go over
 there for to get your - the water. See, back and forth.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It wouldn't be so nice in the wintertime doing that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, it wasnae so nice you see, then you had - had to - watch the - the - the boards for slip you see for the frost and that. But - the 
- the water was handy - in the burn for - for - for doing rough work you see, like I mean for - wash -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But it wasn't for drinking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. Oh wasna for drinking. It - but it was handy - for washing out the - byre and - things like that is it. It - it -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How did you meet your husband, it was about then that you met him was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well - I got to know him - as a young fellow when we were up Crawick Glen, because you see - his - his - his father was a shepherd, you see, my husbands father was a s
hepherd, and he was helping my father - he was helping his father - before he joined up onto the police in Dumfries you see. And - and - to the Royal Borough. So - that was - of course that was coming on for nineteen fourteen, when the first world war sta
rted. But he - he - he used to cycle past, we could see him you see, his - he lived -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He lived further up the Glen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He lived up the Glen, further up the Glen. Over a - over a a bridge - in the house set in - at a field, that was the - that was wh
ere they shifted - from Wanlockhead you see, the - as a rule - the - it was WanLockhead you see where they - were brought up, my husband was schooled at Wanlockhead. And - and they were brought up - at - Dun - Duntercleuch was the name of the - of the pla
c
e. The - the Elliots, you know, the Elliots are the great farmers there. So I daresay there - there - there is some of the Elliots living yet at - at - at carries on - but - but no - no in this - big as still - as what they did before you see. Great sheep
 men you know, great }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 hefford sheep men and that aye. So that like -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 So you knew your husband from quite an early age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - early, well you see he was - we used to - we used to get his company maybe - say if he was cycling - if he was cycling d
own he used to - maybe get his company down to Sanquhar if we were cycling. It was all cycling and that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I suppose if you had some of these sprees at the house you would see him at that kind of thing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He - he - he was - he was down - he was down
 at - at odd ones you know, just at - it was - the sprees at - that the shepherds used to have in their houses. But - but - coming down - so - I was - I was in Sanquhar you see. I was at Mrs Tweddle's a good wee while too, at Sanquhar before I left. But I
 
put in my time in. And I said I'm making for Tinwald. So when - when the - you see - it was just a case that - I got into the - well they wanted me into the Red Cross some of the girls that was round about and some of - you know, the - when they get into 
t
he Red Cross there was a branch - at Locharbriggs you see. And the schoolmaster - we - wife - they were at Catherinefield school - and - and - a - a - of course they're - they're dying away now but - the - they were schoolmaster and - and his wife, and - 
and they were sort of heads - of this branch of the - of the Red Cross. So - we - that you had to - get - get as many as they could for to make up this - this wee - branch you see at Locharbriggs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of things did you do there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Well - jus
t went to meetings, went to the meetings and - suchlike as that to - and there was some of the - the - but - you see - Arol Johnson's - Arrol Johnson's motor works - was - was started then too. Of course it - it's all changed now and it's - it's the Uniro
y
al you know, a terrible big rub - rubber company, but - but when it was owned then - when - when we started - in - in Tinwald - it was Arrol Johnson's works you see, and there were - some - some of the - some of the people - round about, the young fellows
 
- you see - they - they went to the work there you know, started at seven in the morning. And - so there was one of the girls - she was at - she was in the - in - she was in the Red Cross as well, and she says, could you no start in - in the - in the moto
r works, just to see - and - and it was always helping. But the war was coming on then you see, and - and - they were beginning to start with - taking sort of government work - you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They would be quite busy then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, it was quite - started 
to be quite busy you see, and then - I - I did - eventually join up - I got in - I had my bicycle - then, and - and - I cycled like - away for - to clock - we had to clock in at seven o'clock in the morning see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort of work did you do there then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
It was - it was a - it was machines, it was - it wasnae very nice work you see but - work that you couldnae - sort of - my - my machine when I started first was on - it was grinding you know, sort of - gear - gears you know, gears and - and - they 
- they were done - they were done with this - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 grinding}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 . Of course -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it the sort of thing that you had to be very careful with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Ayes, It - it was - it - it was just that the - there were - they were sort of - you'd to keep - putting the stuff
 on for - for - like sort of black stuff - to shake on - to keep them grinded down, to keep them - and then you could take them - you could take them along to - to get them - to get them - tested, take them along and get them tested, and - and - if they w
erena right you had to bring them back you see to - to work them down to a certain -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you get paid quite well for that kind of job then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was it better pay than working in a house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, it wasnae highly paid, it wasnae highly
 paid, you'd the - the - of course the - the - if I could work - work - of course I wasnae experienced you see that enough for - to - to lifting a big wage or that you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you paid on the number that you actually did?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye. Aye, but - it wa
s very - you were very well done to do them - there was a canteen too that you could get your food at if you wanted to, but you just carried the piece with us - down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 How long did you work there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I was there 'til - I - I was there 'til I h
ad the accident. Aye. I had a - I had a - I had an accident - cycling accident. It - that's what - aye, aye, I had - I had a cycling accident, I had - I had four months in - Dumfries in Galloway Royal Infirmary.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What happened?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It was a - down Ti
nwalk Brae. You see, the - we - we lived up like - this wee - wee thatched cottage we had - it was between the - the joiner Browns, there are no any joiners now, 'cos they're all away, but there was Browns on both sides of us, good neighbours we had too, 
a
nd - and - and the Browns was further down. So - I was off this morning - I cycled on, and I said to mother I says, I may be a wee bit later than night coming back at - I hadnae got away - for I - I - I - I was on my bike and - and it's - it's pretty stee
p
 brae - Tinwald Brae, and then you see, the - there - there a road - comes through. Well it - it - it'd take - it takes you right through and - and it would get you through to Collin too, you know, but - farms - farmers on the sides like, so this - the - 
t
his road, it was quite near - in fact my sister was down for - for the - at the farms too, she come down here to be near Tinwald, and - and to be - near my father and mother. And she was in this farm, the Barbours at Tinwald Parks. And - the - so she was 
g
etting on awful grand too living there and - and she - she - she - she done - she's dead now my sister but she - she married and went away to Australia you see. But - this happened you see - that - that quick. You see, the - the - the - this car - it was 
B
arbour's you know, Parks car - with his sons, and he was coming out of the - this - along that road, and - and you see my - I was going down the - Tinwald Brae on my bicycle, but still I was on the - on the right side that I should have been, right enough
 side that I should have been on, but I didnae know that - if he had been turning - turning the car down I would - I would have escaped all right. But you see he was turning right across the road to come up to Tinwald Brae you see, because -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go right into him then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
He had another farmer to meet, and they were going away to a Lanark horse sale. They were going away you see, that was - that was what they were making for. But - he - he never - they never got there. He had his car - certainly
. So - I - this - this is just - was too late you see, there's a great big tree - great big tree, oh it was awfully big and bushy then, they said it was to come down but it never come down but they - they took some of the branches off it, it was - big hea
v
y tree. And - however I just got it. And my bicycle right over the - right over his car. I couldnae - couldnae stop you see. 'Cos he just come along that quick. And - and I landed - oh I was knocked out you see, the - I landed at - the side that you come 
out - with me - I landed - well - just for good luck I didna land - beside the dyke. If my head had struck the dyke I would have been a g}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 u}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 nner. But you see I - I - I - went right over the - the - engine of his car, I did damage to the engine of his car with
 the forks of my bike. What - it was - it was a big enough - kick up - it was a - and it was - an - Oc - October - I had just got my twenty - I had just got my twenty-fourth birthday past, and - that's the last day of September, and this was happening - i
n the beginning of October. And - and - so I - I got out of that - knocked out then. And then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you go back to work at all after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. No, it - no at the motor works, no, no, I wasnae back there because it took me a long time to - to get 
over the - operations you see, and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you have a fractured skull or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. They - they - they - got this head you see, got here, and then you see, it had to be an operation - for - to get me - get me right you know, like - I - I
 was - sometimes I was conscious and sometimes I wasnae conscious, you see, so - some - and I was - this - they - they said they need a - I was - kept singing, I kept singing after I was in the - this was 'til I had the operation then. But however - the -
 
this happened and - and - of course - the neighbours - there were some of the neighbours you see that - that was up - on what they Kirkland - Kirkland it is called now, well they were coming down - the brae - behind me on their bicycles, and - and - they 
were there to help when they saw like, they were there to help - they helped to lift me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were there ambulances, would you get an ambulance in these days then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. It was awful difficult to get an ambulance. It was awful difficult to get an ambulance, in}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
fact there were - there were only one - at the - at the infirmary at that time. The - the - the - the joiners - the - the joiners who got a Mr Brown - he - did his best for to get messages through. I think he had a private phone that - that he trie
d to get through that way, and - and - to get the - doctor to come, well - you see, I was unconscious and then - but they carried me - they - they lifted me into this - he had a horse and trap. And went back for his horse and trap. And then they lifted me
 
into the - lifted me off of the side of the road, and - into the trap and he brought - took me up home - took me up to my own home like. And mother got the shock of her life. When I - I landed in - carried in and - and my father you see - he was - he had 
b
een away - helping - he'd been away helping some farmer, and he was just like near - nearly back - and he wasnae aw - he wasnae up like, he was resting you see, and - but however - the - mother got them to help her out of - out of this barn into the chair
 
and tell them that I was hurt and - so - when I was - they were carrying me in - the - the farmer - farmer was there too for - Barbours was there from Tinwald Parks, and he said to - to the - to them, I hope it's not - I hope she's no very - seriously inj
ured. Well, mother, she says, she's a broken leg anyway. She said, she - at least I - she can see that. She was a great spirit mother do you ken. And - and she was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She seems to have taken everything in her stride.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 She was. And - and - oh - I -
 we did them an awful lot of harm certainly, it was a big shock for them. A bigger shock for them than what it was for me. As the doctor - as the doctor said, he says - he said, it was a frac - a fractured femur. Aye. A fractured femur you see, as well, o
n
 my left side got it for that was the side that the - where the car was coming and that was my side - that I was going down on - on the road. And I thought I was going to do all right and be at the - works at seven o'clock but I never got there at - and t
hat was another hullabaloo at the works, when I hadnae turned up you see. And - and - they - the - they phoned down there to say that I'd had an accident and I wouldnae be able - so -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 After you came out of hospital and you were better did you do any other jobs before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, no, no, just you see the - the - oh - I - it wasnae much - I didnae tackle much after that you see, because it was -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It would take you a long time to get over it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - aye, the - the late - Doctor Kerr
, the late - Doctor Pitter married Kerr, he was just newly back - he - he was a military man you ken, and he was just newly back - from the war. And - he was - he was going to - he was starting at the infirmary again he was the sur - surgeon, and - when t
h
is - I was the case that - that landed in, but it - it was nine - nearly night before they got - they got me in. You see, aye, you see, they couldnae get the - they couldnae get through for the ambulance and - couldnae get through for the doctor, but the 
-
 the - it was an elderly doctor that come in - that - that came to - and the - he was - he was - mother was a - a - used to him, he was Doctor Ferguson and - he says, oh, he says, she shouldn't have been lying in here. See I was lying in the bed in the ki
t
chen. He says, it's time she was in - into the infirmary, he says. And - and - you know, I - I just says - I says, I was aye saying, no, I'll be all right. I'm hurt, I says, I know, but - I - he said - put up my hand to my head and - I - it just felt like
 
as if it was a pulp you know. He said, aye - and - it - it - it was the fracture you see. The front - the frontal bone - pressing - pressing on the brain. And you see if I hadnae had the operation, I wouldnae have been right. I couldnae have - I wouldnae 
have been right.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You were lucky in a way that there was somebody there who could do the operation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Yes, well - just happened to to be lucky. You see, he - his - he was back and - and - so - he was - he had got one of the - I was in - I was in wh
at they called one of the new wards at that time, there was - it was ward - thir - fourteen, ward fourteen, a big - big ward it was. It's all changed now though. I think it's }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 
a - it was - turned it into an }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 x}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
ray place I think or something. But - but it was
 Doctor Livingstone - Doctor Livingstone's ward. When he was on. But - Doctor Kerr - got it when he come back, and it was his ward you see. So I got in there. And they put me into a corner bed just at the - the head of the - of the back stair like it - wa
s a back stair that they - put me by. And I could - see the folk - see - them going back and forward, well after I got better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What were the doctors like in the hospital, were they nice doctors?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh they were good, they were good to me. Aye, they were awful good to me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Sometimes you feel doctors are not the same as ordinary folk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Aye, but they were quite - they were - it was a - a case that - I needed attention you see and - I got into the what was called surgical ward - surgical on
e you see, and then there was surgical two, and that - each had doctors. Well they - they came all - back and forward regular, take turns at my bedside, they never left my bedside. No. And - and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you got better did you get lots of friends coming to visit you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Well, they didna let anybody in but mother you see to begin with, mother - mother - they - they kept - they kept my mother informed you see about what was doing, but then she got in to see me you see when - before the operation. But - 
it was - the trouble - the great trouble was - you know, the - it's a good job that the - that - there's - get forward with her work too because it - the leg - was set - you know, the old - paling slabs that you used to see, the long - the long palings sl
a
bs, they werena - it wasnae like splints as they do now - now and - and working a different system now for - for any break, but - I was - bandaged - and tied to the - this big paling thing, from here right down to the toe, and bandaged to it you see. To k
e
ep my - to keep me right, and I - I could hardly move you see, and then - there was just me and another - woman - she was on the other side of me, and - and she - she had - the nurses told her - to keep her eye on me too you see because - I - if I got res
t
less - she was to - to cry and that, but - so I - there was just once that I - that - that - I - says, I - dear goodness, I says, I cannae work - tied up like this, I said, I'll have to get away back to my work you see. This is me. I - I'd - I'd sorted ro
u
nd my - my head then ready for the operation as well, and - I started to undo the - all the bandages. And - and I was - going at - going at when - when - Mrs McKnight it was, she was - she had cried out on the - on the nurse, the - the - nursing sister, a
nd she comes in and the nursing sister says - oh, she says, all right she says, what the matter with you? I said, get the thing away. Well, she says, your}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 leg'll be all wasted. And - well I says, I canna lie tied up like this, I says - and she says, you'll 
just have to lie tied up like that 'til it - 'til the - your leg gets - right better. 'Til it's - however - Doctor Cameron set it again, Doctor Kerr - come and set it again, and he says, now, he says, you'll have to lie still, he says, because - if you do
n
't your leg'll we all wriggly you know, it wouldna be right set. So - it - it was - it was terribly well set mind you. And - and - and - and - and it was going to be straight of course. But I - I got the - I got that arm brushed over it, and I was quite d
e
fying - and - and I'd had to have this operation. And - my mother got in you see to see me and - she was upset you see about me. And I said, I'll be all right mother, I says, I'm - I'm in quite good hands, I said, I'll I - I'll be all right, I said. So I 
-
 I just sort of - pinned my faith in - in - the Lord round about me to help me, and I got - got on fine. Got a heavy dose of chloroform though. The - the - there was some of the dark doctors working in there where the - and they had to help Doctor Kerr an
d
 - and then there were a sis - Sister Rowan, she - she was the main one for - for - Doctor Kerr, and she - and - and - and Sister - oh she's dead now, this other Sister, she's just - she was - she was very far forward too. Sis - Sister - I - what was the 
name? She was -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They were all kind to you anyway?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye, they were all kind. The people lived - if people lived in Annon Road anyway. And she used to go and see her. But however - they - they waited hand and foot on me. They couldnae be better. Da
y and night, they never - never left my bedside. And - and - and I - and I - had a beautiful - a - I saw it after I came out of the chloroform, when they brought me - I'd a good - I'd a heavy dose of chloroform and it was while - while I - for - they just
 waited on me - 'til they saw a movement - to see - if I was going to be - going to live. Doctor Kerr gave us up on the bed - on the - on the - operating table, he says, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 I doubt, he says, she
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 ll no live, he says. He says, I - I felt as if I was mad - to tac
kle that you see. He never had tried anything of the kind before. So it seems - it - as - as - as the - as the blow - had fractured - this bone. Had fractured you see and it was pressing on the brain, the brain was - and - and that was - and he had - had 
to have three - three fining done. Aye, three fining. And no - it was - really it was - it was marvellous you ken.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 You're lucky to be here at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 It was a miracle. That was what - that was what they told me - a living miracle. And I was in four month. Just with that alone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 When you were a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 young girl and you were out courting did your mother tell you when you had to be in at night and }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid6424897\charrsid5586003 did}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003  she want to know who you were with and so on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, and we were never - we were never out really la
te - I mean - never was late like - without telling her where we were - like - we was out maybe at a - at a concert or - or - or something like that, but - we never was - hanging about or anything like that, no. And then she knew -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 As long as she knew where you were and who you were with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Aye. Yes. And then - my sister of course you see she - she - she was - work - working with the - the farmer you see that had the car at - at - the - acci - that the accident to happen, and - she - so she - she g
ave up her - she gave up her place too, you see, she - it was a pretty heavy job she had too, it was farm house, a big farm house, and ten she had to do milk - milking to do and all sorts of things and - but she - she gave it up to help my mother and that
 you see, and - in the home and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
When you were living up a Crawick Glen did you ever see any policemen up there at all, did the Sanquhar policemen visit you or did you ever see a policeman at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh they come over - in - in - in - they 
- they came over at certain times - to get their book signed, to get their books - aye, they - they - they - they werenae regular on the go you know, but - - you never know 'til they - they - they come over - over the hills, there was nothing to them you 
s
ee. It - it was one of them they called - I think it was Les - Leslie or - or something they called him, and - and he had a big district to do, so - he used to come down and - and have a crack with father and mother and that and - and get his book signed 
you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But he was a friend really? Your mother never threatened you with the police when you were naughty did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No. She - she said - they - they - he used to come to the parties - my husband too you see, the wee bits of parties that they had
. And - he had - he asked my mother - if she would keep me - for him you see, like because he was - he was going to - join up in the - in the police force and - and - and - his - very likely he says I'll need a wife you see. And - and - and this was what 
happened - they say - that is what he said like. So -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 He asked your mother before he asked you did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
And she says, she says, I'll see what I can do, she said, I'll try she says but she says - they're - they're - she says, I'm losing - my other
 lassie, she says, as well. There were just the two of us, my sister and I. And - however, as time went on - I never thought that it - it would - never thought of him - as a - as a husband so - no, I never thought of him - him as a husband. Because you se
e
 the - it was just when I come back onto the - into Dumfries - well - well an odd time I met in with him when he got into the uniform you see. You see, he was - he - the first year - he - the first year - he - he joined up in 1914. And there's retired - i
n 1945. And - so - oh he was a good big fine looking fellow, there were nae getting away from it. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 But you just hadn't thought about him at all as a husband?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, seriously like you see thinking that he'd do very well for a husband.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Was there anybody else that you thought you might like to marry before he came along?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
Oh there were a - odd ones that you - you know, that you - that you was work - working beside and that you know and - just be an odd time but - however - it didnae come off, it just had to be that fellow.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
We've heard that in some places if there was a family came into the district that nobody liked, or if they had done something that people disapproved of, they used to go round to the house at night and make noises 
and bother the people 'til they went away. Have you heard of anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 
-No. No, there never - never - we never had any - you know, any difficulties, you know, in living in the country. In - in the cottages, my father and mother no - never any really disturbed us like that you see. But - they -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were there amny outsiders came to live round about you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye - aye, this - this farm - the - the - shepherds - shepherds you see, they had to come - and - and do the hammerings and things. Th
at was like when we was up Crawick Glen, aye. They - you see, they - they had - they come from far over the hills and that, and - and it was like what you call a handling day, you see, big day, and mother had to - mother had to feed them you see. She did 
-
 she - they were - they - generally done - it was generally done in - if the - at the folds as you call it, and the - and the stuff - the stuff was carted up to them, you know, the food - was - was carted up to them. Aye, just to save a - having - she had
nae room in the house for - see - had it outside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Did you ever have any Irishmen coming over looking for work?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Oh - oh there were - oh there were odd - odd Irishmen used to come round about. But - mother - mother never employed any of them. They
 never employed any of them like. Like the - that was round about. I don't know -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they not keen on the Irish then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 No, don't think - you see, they - there - they were great workers of course you see a lot of them, but she - they didnae - yo
u see, father didnae - take on any - and then you see, Mr Hunter you see, it was just - newly taken on to this farm you see and - and - and he wasna employing anybody - that - very much either. See he was just starting you see. And his wife. So you see my
 
- and my father wanted to - to get away the first year, he says, oh he says, don't leave me here he says. Dinna leave, he said, because, he said, I've got such a good character about you, he says, and - and he says, I'm just starting this - this - this go
ing he says and - and to tell you the truth he says I know nothing about it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 What sort offolk were they, were they the same sort of class as yourself or were they better off than your father would be?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They - they what? They -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were they the same sort of folk as yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Yes. Yes. Oh they were - yes, the - they belonged to way about - Creetown - Creetown or something I think, aye, and then -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 They must have had a bit money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Aye, and - and - and they were both farming side you s
ee, but no the - it was the sheep I think - that - that - you see his was a sheep farm you see, and then my father was experienced in the she - in his sheep. So - he kept a hold of him, he says - he says, oh I want - I keep - keep a hold of you he says, d
inna go away and leave me now. So of course you see my father - my father - he says, I'll do all the repairs and things for you. Put all your stuff right, so - that settled things all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 I think you were quite happy up there weren't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 And 
- and we - eleven years we put in up there, and then - you see, mother - mother seemed to get the strength and she did all the inside work you know and - and then we'd a good way of - of living, because we could keep - we keep two cows, and two pigs, and 
a lot of hens, and all that see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9461452 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 Were you sort of told how many animals you could keep or was it must up to you yourselves to decide?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid13568274 AS  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid9263038\charrsid5586003 The - the - the - of course there - there were always - the cattle to look after in the byres you see. But that
 was how mother - they - they were away in the summertime you see.
\par }}