{\rtf1\adeflang1025\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\adeff0\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}{\f38\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f39\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f41\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f42\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f43\fbidi \froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f44\fbidi \froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f45\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f46\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f49\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f53\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f54\fbidi \fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f55\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f56\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden 
Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tblind0\tblindtype3\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs20 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid2640945\rsid3281826\rsid4152482\rsid5251090\rsid7602635\rsid9183034\rsid10121859\rsid15993820}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.0000;}{\info{\title Information about interviewee}
{\author SEENU}{\operator lhorto}{\creatim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\revtim\yr2008\mo11\dy28\hr16\min9}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords24276}{\nofchars138375}{\nofcharsws162327}{\vern24613}{\*\password 00000000}}{\*\xmlnstbl {\xmlns1 http://
schemas.microsoft.com/office/word/2003/wordml}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0\ltrsect 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\donotembedsysfont0\donotembedlingdata0\grfdocevents0\validatexml1\showplaceholdtext0\ignoremixedcontent0\saveinvalidxml0\showxmlerrors1\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nojkernpunct\rsidroot10121859 \fet0
{\*\wgrffmtfilter 013f}\ilfomacatclnup0\ltrpar \sectd \ltrsect\linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \ltrpar
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5251090 \rtlch\fcs1 \af0\afs24\alang1025 \ltrch\fcs0 \fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 
\f1\ul\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 Information about interviewee}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid5251090 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\ul\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tx2057\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5251090 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 Date of birth}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090    
\tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2640945 1970}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 
\par Gender}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090           \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2640945 M}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 Marital status}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090  
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2640945 Married}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16544153 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 Occupation}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090  }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2640945 Printer - machine ruler}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 
\par Geographic region}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090 \tab }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 :}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid2640945 London}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af1 \ltrch\fcs0 \f1\insrsid5251090\charrsid16072257 
\par }\pard \ltrpar\qj \fi-490\li518\ri0\sa240\widctlpar\wrapdefault\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin518\itap0\pararsid5251090 {\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When were you married, your year of marriage?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - when my mother died you se
e - 'course they all got married, I was the youngest, see - and 'course the old chap got - only two - another brother, the other two died, see I was the youngest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many brothers and sisters did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He had four sons and two daughters. And he was a nice old chap, he was fifty-six when he died. He had - patch on the brain, and in fact he 
\{BLANK\} see. And of course he used to make a fuss of me. So when he died - you see - or before he died there was me and my brother only with him you see, in
 the barbers shop to help him. I go into the - go to work and there he is sitting in the chair - his bread and cheese in his pocket you see and - passed away, because - we had to work 'til ten o'clock at night, twelve o'clock Saturdays and all day Sundays
,
 so the only recreation we had - was to go to a public house and have a drink and give us a bread - bread and cheese in his pocket. There I was when I went in the shop - passed away in the barbers chair with - all his clothes on, sitting there asleep, he 
w
as. Nice old chap. I'm very - and before I got married I married between twenty and twenty-one, see. He says, dad I know - he says - Bill - well Charilie really we called him, Bill, he says, I hear you're going to get married. I said, yes dad. He said, wi
l
l you put if off for three months see? I said, yes dad. And in that three months he passed away. If I hadn't have done that I should have never forgot it would I? Might never - wouldn't we - put it off for three months. So of course when he passed away I 
h
ad to - really - get married. My brother was a nasty chap. He said, now dad's gone you've got to go, 'cos he had the shop then see, left to him. 'Course I didn't go in for barbering, I was in for printing. And so he says - you ain't coming here, and I sai
d, what? So I see a policeman. I says to a policeman, my son turned me out since my - dad's passed away. He said, do you pay any rent to him? I said, yes. So he says to my brother - \{BLANK\}
 'Ciurse I had to get married as quick as I could. 'Cos I couldn't last in there with him. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You were about twenty-one when you got married were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well say about twentyone.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What year were you born?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Hundred years ago. Oh my - my birth - I was born in - twenty - February 27th 1870. I was - I was bor
n. And I - my next birthday when I'll be a hundred and two, it'll be next February. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 It's not long is it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Only three or four months. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you remember the house you first lived in as a child, can you remember where you were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I - yes, Chapel Street. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long did you stay in that house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
How long? Twenty-seven years. Then of course he had to move because so many stalls in the street - that the people couldn't get to the shop. A barbers shop in the finish you see. Chapel Street \{BLANK\}
 So of course we went to Shadwell. From Shadwell went to Cross Street. And from Cross Street - we went to - Cross Street - yes, I think it was Cross Street where we finished up, at Cross Street, yes. Yes, finished up at Cross Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But most of your childhood you spent in Chapel Street did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you know how old your father was when you were born, was he a young man, you were the youngest child were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I should say he was a young man. I t
hink he was thirty-five his wife, passed away. 'Course my daughter's got all my certificates. I've got a daughter. She's turned seventy. She's living at Hastings.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So your mother died soon after you were born did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When I was three year old.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So who bought you up, who looked after you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
My father. My father never took another woman into the home - the shop. Only just one woman, his wife. He had no other women in there. So he was a proper good father you know. Well he liked me being the y
oungest. See I had three other brothers. They was older of course they got married. You see what I mean? I used to work for - twenty-five years - at the Educational Society. They used to have a - a place in Shoe Lane. Shoe Lane there by }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 \rquote  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 name, w
hat the name of that - turning up near Borough - Shoe Lane in the City, there be Holborn and - yes. That's where I got to - where I worked. Then I went down - dodged about different places you see, then I joined the army when I was forty-five. I wasn't ca
lled up, I was waiting to be called up. I was six years - in the 21st Middlesex in Penton Street, Pentonville. I joined the volunteers there - for six years I was with them. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't want to be a barber?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Didn't like it. No. Well see, now I was aroun}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 
d about - see, I was - I was que}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
er you see once - I mean I had double rupture you see. Well when I went to Hampstead, I didn't go to Hampstead 'fore I was ninety-one. Me wife didn't die before she was eighty-seven, a weak heart, soon as she died 
you see - five months after I went into a h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 ome at Hampstead. I had double h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
ernia, see - and the nurse there said, look here Mr Mennie, you've got to have that operation. She says. There's a lady had it done at ninety, I was ninety-one - when I had the - I 
was ninety-one when I went in - in the home at Hampstead, I waited five months. And at ninety-three I had the operation. And I come through successful. They say if you have a - typhoid fever you get a new inside. But - I was ninety-three when I had the op
e
ration. Within two or three weeks I had the operation for that and I haven't had it since. They takes it right away. Take why didn't the doctor tell me to have a - operation - when I was younger, right? I - I was wearing a belt for eight years. I - wore t
he belt for eight years in the - in the home and all. They took that eight years right away from me having that operation. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father ever do anything else besides being a barber?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used - used - yes, I - I went to - I helped him in the
 shop. And I worked as the - machine ruler - in the printing. I followed that job up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But he never did anything else besides barbering, your father was always a barber was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't do any other jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. I helped him in th
e shop. Ten o'clock weekdays, twelve o'clock Saturday, all day Sunday. See, I was a great help to him. Couldn't afford to get anybody else to - didn't shave only about once a week, a penny. Penny a shave, tuppence or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 pence haircut. Once a week, you h
ad to wait - I had to wait for it, perhaps we did have a man come in for a shave and a haircut, see. Things was very quiet then. Lucky to get work. I was - oh he was a nice man, my father. I think he was.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You don't remember your mother at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 N
o. Well I tell you this much. I know she was married - he was married to her and Italian woman. Italian woman. That's who he married. Italian woman. She was thirty-five when she died.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father come from London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I - I think he was born 
in - Suffolk or Norfolk. I think he was born - 'course it's a Scotch name. Is Mennie. Because the clergyman says to him, your name's Mennie. That should be - scarce name in Scotland, he says, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your mother ever work after she was married, do you know that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I couldn't tell, being three. I couldn't tell that. I know she was an Italian woman, or - Italian family where she come from. He knew her - in Leather - Leather Lane, where she was - where he had a shop. He had a shop in Leather Lane befo
re he come to Chapel Street you see. And - and - he went there and stopped there twenty-seven years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Did you have any other relatives living with you? Only your family lived there, you didn't have any lodgers in your house, or relatives living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Only when I was in - when - when I went on me own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But when you were a little boy, only your brothers and your father lived with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The only - we had every - he had - he had no other woman come round, only to take the laundry away. See?
 I couldn't remember my mother at all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You had a woman who came in to do the laundry, is that all she'd do, she didn't do any housework?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, me and the old chap and one thing and another used to tidy the place up. She done the laundry. Only the laundry. This woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she go to your house or would she take it away?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Sent away. Sent away. To be done.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So your father did everything in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Everything. Everything. Ha'penny eggs for tea. And have it when you got the chance. Couldn't close the shop up. Yes, ha'penny eggs we had.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father do any decorating in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. He did do something to the house. You know those paraffin what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid10121859\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
name. Ay? Using paraffin then to - years ago. He made a what yo
u call a cylinder - cylinder - like - and put some - some - paraffin - you know, what's got the wick with it and all that in this here - you have a pole thing like a brass tube, he put the paraffin in that and put these - clocks - these - paraffin lamps o
n
 it and lit it. He used to, in his spare time, he used to - mend clocks. He could play a violin. He could play a cornet, he could. Yes. Oh yes. Yes, a cornet. Many a time when I've been in bed and he's been in bed same bedroom, something's gone bang, he s
aid, cor - cor, that's the violin I spoke. Yes. Oh he's a very - very clever man. He was. Oh yes. Oh he was a clever man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He did everything for you, when you were little he'd dress you and bath you would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He was the one who always looked after you even when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Father you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would he read stories to you, would he tell you stories at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Glad to get to bed, work and all - so long.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he ever take you out for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well he took 'em ou
t for a walk but he was very stout, see. We went to a theatre, my and my brother - brother took him to a theatre. Well we was walking along from the Britannia Theatre in - Gabriel Street, and he says, you'd better go on I can't keep up with you, 'cos he w
a
s very stout. Very stout man see. Well being fatty heart he would have it. Yes, I still - never forgotten, if I hadn't have put my wedding off for three months - he died in them - I should never have forgot that. Well my wife, she died when she was just o
n eighty-seven. She's been dead here - since - between eighty-nine - oh - between ninety and ninety-one she passed away, I was living in - Wharfdale Road \{BLANK\}
 at the time. I was there fifty years. And I had notice to get out because they was going to pul
l it down to make a - a bigger garage do you see. And in that time she passed away, and I was pleased. 'Cos I didn't want to go first. She went first. There was four years between us and - she was seventeen when I got married, I was twenty-one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was a young girl wasn't she?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. And I had - two sons and two daughters. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Did you have to do any jobs around the shop when you were a little boy, or around the home, did you have to help at home when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I helped in his shop and put the lather on a man's face.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How old were you then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well I daresay I was between - not much older than twelve and fourteen. Because I left school when I was twelve. I went to school in White Lion Street. And - I was twelve when I left, and they used to put me writing on the wall. You know - for copy.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Because you were good at it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Mm. Twelve when I left school. Well there was only - nothing else for me to do pass the examinations - so I helped father as much as I could in between - 'til I got a little job at five shillings a week. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Did your brothers have to help in the home, did they help your father look after the house and do cleaning and things, would all the boys have to help?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They didn't have much to do. They went into a barbers shop themselves you see. And they didn't help him much. I had to help him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You were the one that helped most?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I helped him. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you'd help look after the house as well would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And with the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - I - wash the chairs and - steps and one thing and another. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have to go to bed at a certain time when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - of course when we shut the shop we wasn't - was time, we're there all day 'til ten o'clock at 
night you see a weeknight. Twelve o'clock - glad to get to bed. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And your father would put you to bed would he?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh - he would.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many rooms did you have in your house, do you remember how many rooms there were at Chapel Street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh, in the shop - in the shop you mean or where I was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 In the shop when you were young,
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 In the shop we had a little upstairs room. That's all. Upstairs - over the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you sleep in there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh we had a kitchen. You see. Yes, back of the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you eat there as well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you all shred the bedroom upstairs did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well there's - oh well my - as soon as they - as soon as they got - time went on they got married before they was up then and away, see.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you have a bath?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to have a bath. See, I just went - I expect the old chap used to bath us at home. In a big - big tub you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How often do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Not too often.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How often would you have clean clothes in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Clothes? We had the best you could. 'Cos when I was a boy - I went in the shop once - and the shop was full, he says, here - you been fighting? 'Course - used to - boys
 used to fight them days. He says - I didn't mind you doing it, but, he says, your shirt was torn. Of course there was not the best of it for underclothes. See? He done his best.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you do about clothes, would your father buy new clothes or would he get someone to make them for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I'll tell you what he did used to do. I was going to Southend - with a flock - what they call a \{BLANK\}
 then, he made me a suit. With a sewing machine. He made me a suit. And he used to mend clocks and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about shoes, would he mend your shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I used to have me shoes in a place in Old Street. Hobnail boots and tips on. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you buy new shoes, would your father buy new shoes for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Otherwise he'd - mend 'em himself. Oh he'd mend them himself, when they wanted mending.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you used to buy clothes and shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
In - in the shops. Old Street - where I bought the boots. And he used to make the - me clothes. What I wore. See? The boots he got from the shop in Old Street. Otherwise the clothes, he made them for us, on a machine.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about meals, did you eat your meals behind the shop most of the time, where would you cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Had to cook - oh we had a - kitchen there where we - back of the shop. See, you use
d to cook there. And have our food at the back of the shop in Chapel Street. The barbers shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you cook on a coal range, a stove?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well it was all - doors are shut, they couldn't see us in the kitchen, the doors were shut. Used to have our f
ood cooked and that in the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would he cook on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well ordinary saucepans, frying pans and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he use coal for cooking, it wasn't a gas stove?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh no, a fire. Frying pans, you see, on the fire. Cook hams in the front of the - the fire.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When would you have breakfast, what time would you eat breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Tell you the truth I only had time for anything and get to work. Had to have it in a coffee stall. Cup of coffee and a - biscuit like. He couldn't - he had the shop to look after see and I had to get out early to get to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you were at school, did you have breakfast when you were at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I - I left school at twelve and I done - well I helped as much as I could when I left school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were a boy you'd have something to eat at home would you before you went to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you used to have for breakfast?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh he done his best. Oh he done his best for me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you eat for breakfast in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well - I tell you what we used to have at Saturday when we was busy. For tea we had ha' - two or three ha'penny eggs, and bread and butter. When we had a chance, the shop was empty.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you do for the middle of the day, a meal in the 
middle of the day? Would your father close the shop to have a meal in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He kept it open all them times them hours I've told you. And we got to have our food - when we had a chance and no customers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you have for lunch, what would you eat in the middle of the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well to tell you the truth - I've had bullocks heart for Sundays dinner. Or a baked potato from the baked potato - Charlie like what baked 'em for supper, you see. Or - bit of pease pudding and - saveloy for supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever have special things on Sundays? Did you ever have special meals on Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We had bullocks heart - and sausages. That's when we got the customers to buy it.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father didn't ever bake his own bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he ever make jam or pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I don't think so, no, we had - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't ever bottle any fruit or make wine?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Had margar}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 i}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
ne and all that with it see. Oh he couldn't have the time to do it himself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't brew any beer or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
He wouldn't ask - he would - he used - we used to have a - a sweep come in our barbers, see - in the barbers, he used to have his hair cut and a shave. And do you know, he would never - ask that man - to come and do the chimney f
or sixpence. He used to set the chimney alight. Yes. He - he would not - let the man pay. He - he didn't want the mess to clear up I expect or something of that, I know he used to - set the chimney alight. Oh he used - he used to make a fuss of me but he 
never spoilt me. See? Never spoilt me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any garden or yard behind the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No, I'll tell you - I'll tell you what - in front the shop was a bit - bit of space. We used to have a butcher have his there - in the front of the barbers you
 see, not interfering with the doorway - where they went in. Where he used to put his meat and sell it of a Saturday - evening of Sat - Saturday - he used to, and Sunday morning. Yes. What he had left from Saturday was put in the barbers shop and covered 
up, and brought out the Sunday morning. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to buy much fruit and vegetables when you were a child, did you eat many fruit and vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Not too much, you know. Had to have as much as you could. Much as you could get. Oh you couldn
't overdo it. Didn't have the money. Penny a shave, threepence a haircut - once a week almost. Oh it was hard times. He managed to get through it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you remember eating things like tinned vegetables or tinned fruit at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't think that was up there much then.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Or dried vegetables or dried fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Couldn't afford it. Couldn't afford the fruit.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you keep any rabbits or chickens?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. We had pigeons. Then I had rabbits.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you look after them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Well I remem
ber the pigeons you know. 'Cos - we used to have a man - come there - to borrow the shop while we were shut evening - to open - to let loans to people a certain day you see. And I was looking through one of the peepholes do you see, 'cos the barbers shop 
was there, }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 the}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  man - what was - doing the loans was that side, see, I broke me nose looking through the peephole. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He'd lend money to people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well he - couldn't very well - let 'em have a shave, you couldn't much - it's a wonder they had the penny for a shave.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever eat tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Wasn't up much then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you eat meat very often in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If I could get it. Well we had mostly fish and potatoes you see - and - from the fish shop. And sausages or bullocks heart f
or Sundays dinner. Yes. No other meat. Well sometimes he'd get a breast of mutton for sixpence, in Chapel Street you know. There was a man used to auctioneer 'em up, and they were sixpence each. He's - had it cooked for - for dinner you see. We had oven -
 like and all that - to put it in with the fire. Oh he could do anything like that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever eat the rabbits you kept?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Didn't you feel worried about doing that? Do you remember your father ever having less food so that you boys could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, didn't have much left. Only just enough for ourselves. Well I - one night I - I know I got a sheep}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s head I think - and I had some pease pudding. The old chap said, give us a bit of that. I tell you, you had to have ends meet - them
 days. There wasn't much left for him. You couldn't afford to do much. Not as regards feeding us up.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you ever remember feeling hungry, were you ever hungry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, not exactly you know, just had enough of - bread and butter and ha'penny eggs. 
Very often I've had these ha'penny eggs for - Saturday. 'Course I was at work other days. I used to take a bit of something with me. Bread and cheese or something.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you allowed to talk during meals when you were at home, would you talk to each oth
er at the table? Were you allowed to talk while you were eating?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - we didn't - didn't talk much. We behaved ourselves more than talk you know, but it - glad to get it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would happen if you left food uneaten on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was nothing l
eft there. Nothing left. No. You had to go and get a ha'penny baked potato or - or ha'penny bit of fish, potatoes - or a baked potato - from the - the vans used to bake 'em - outside a public house. They used to have these - potatoes you know, ready to se
ll for a penny. Used to have one of them for supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could you ask for a second helping if there was more food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Didn't have none left. All we - could have is just enough to feed us. Nothing left.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you expected to hold your knife and fork 
in a certain way and sit properly at the table? Did you have to hold your knife and fork properly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh he - he was all - he was there. He see you was all right. Proper way.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could you bring toys or a book to the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, we had newspapers at
 times. Shop was generally full you know of a weekend. The other parts of the day, well - nothing at all doing. Only Saturday and Sunday. That's all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were sitting at the table if you wanted the salt could you ask someone to pass it to you or 
did you have to wait until it was offered to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When could you leave the table, when you'd finished the meal or would you have to ask to get down?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well you had to leave your meal 'cos the customer perhaps'd come in the shop, see?
 You had to keep the shop open. Then come and finish it when he'd - had a shave or haircut.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you always have to sit down at the same places when you were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who served the meal, your father would serve it would he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Mm. See, all the brothers - my brothers are a lot older than me do you see. So they'd left me - left him with me and - my other brother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many years between you and your brothers then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I - I should think there was about - how lo
ng - about three years, about two years and ten months - and twelve - and twelve. Eldest was about two years and ten months. He was older than me. I was the - twelve. And he was about - sixteen. Well he had the shop. See? Yes, when father died at fifty-tw
o.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about your older brother, where was he, how old was he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
They - they got - they - well soon as they - got - up they left and went in the printing. One went - opened a barbers shop, but he had to go out to do something, 'cos - could only kee
p us two. He had a shop in - White Conrad Street. The one that was a barber. Two barbers, and two in the print. And I was in the print, that's three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You got on well with your father did you? Your father was a kind man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh he made a fuss of me. He was a kind man. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And he showed a lot of affection to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Me and my brothers - we often used to have a row do you see. And like brothers said, I'll fight you, see? I said, look here, you stop your talking about fighting. When your father's h
ere. You wait 'til your father's not here. Not while he's here. Well there's Nick - my brother's never treated me nice. As I told you, he locked me out from getting into bed when my father died. He did. I had to get a policeman. He had him here and I work
e
d - married as quick as I could if that was the case. I'd had no - I'd had no - no company at all then. And the worst of it is - I got - I got the sack when I got married. Me job. So I says to my wife, shall we put it off? You keep your parents and I'll k
e
ep as long as I can. She said, no, we'll go together. Yes. Yes, quite funny wasn't it. Two lots. Had the shop about - eighteen months or two years, and soon - soon - go in and get the sack. Yes, she was only seventeen. Not much of a scholar, well you wasn
't them days was you? Ay? You had to almost learn yourself.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If you were worried could you talk to your father about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well he had enough trouble of his own. He'd help me if he could. Oh he done his best for me if I was in trouble. Oh yes, he do
ne his best. Oh he was a niceman, good man all over. Well see me taken - take - leaving that three months - shows you that he was a good man and - well I done me best.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did he expect you to behave towards him in those days? Did you have to be well behaved when you were with him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh everything was all right with my father. He fed as much as he could. And done his best for us as much as he could. He couldn't do no more than he - he did do. Oh he was very good man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he like you all to be friendly together, you and your brothers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he know you didn't get on very well?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't like him. My father didn't like - my brother. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Why do you think that was?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well he used to mess about with other women. And he was no age.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 This was when he was a young boy was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When he was about - seventeen or eighteen he used to go with - women you see. He had no character. Not a patch on me. He wasn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father knew that I suppose?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I think he played it out more when - my old chap went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father think that you should hit back if another child hit you, what would he tell you to do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Go and hit him - go and hit him back.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You had to look after yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to go to play dow
n Duncan Terrace in Essex Road you see. And we went where the sheep was. So the landlord - set a dog on us. I was bit up that leg - two or three times with that dog, ad - I was laid up three months - three weeks or three months, I don't know which - but m
y
 old chap says - well - there was something with the man setting a dog on you. So the police court put it off for a week they did, see. Well when they went up for that week and they said - they said they'd settled their case - about - that dog biting you,
 so there was nothing for you to have. No compensation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Not for your clothes or being hurt, nothing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Mm. Nothing. I know I was - two or three months, I think it was, I was ill at home. See because there was - bites all up me leg. 'Course some boys
 had run - I - of course they caught me - the other boys seemed to get away. Well I used to walk as much as I could to work. Mm. Yes, used to walk - or get a - get a tip - a workmen's ticket. Many a time I've walked from - Fenchurch Street, to Holborn Via
duct. Couldn't afford to - you know - go any further. I've been through it. He done his best you see. It was hard times then. 'Cos that were eighty years ago ain't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father think that certain things were wrong, did you - did he bring you up to believe that certain things were right and wrong?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well he - I was with him 'til he died. I was in the shop from when he died. With him. He was - I was helping him in the shop. And I had got of me own see. And I went there to go to work and there he
 is sitting in the chair passed away, coat, trousers and waistcoat on. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did your father think of swearing, did he allow you to swear?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't - didn't swear in front of him. Not like they swear now. Oh no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he think some things wrong, did he think like lying and stealing were wrong?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well I done all - I done all I could, he done all he could - so he knew I was right and he was right, see. That's mostly the way. The only way he had was this other brother of mine. Opposite of me. That's the one he had the trouble with, him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If grown ups were talking at that time were you allowed to join in the conversation?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, you wouldn't join in. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You had to sit quietly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Never joined. Had to let - let him do that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If you did something wrong what would your father do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well we didn't do anything wrong. No, we done our best. I mean that dog biting me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So your father really didn't have to punish you because you were a very good sort of boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh h
e wouldn't do it. I'll tell you what - that bore this out. People come to the home - and asked him to lend them his razor strap, what he straps his razor on. Well he left it to a man - thinking he's strapping his razor. Instead of that he went and give hi
s boy a - a good hiding, and brought the - brought the - that razor strap in pieces. He says, I shall never lend them one again. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you think your father had a great influence on you when you were a boy? You thought a great deal of him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He tho
ught a lot of me. And I wouldn't - I wasn't spoilt through him making a fuss of me. Oh he's a bounder, the brother - older than me. He caused him a lot of worry, he did. Yes. Its a good job I acted as I did, well towards him. Mm. No trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember when it was your birthday, did you used to celebrate birthdays when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Never knew it. Not until I got a certificate.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't used to have birthdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 See what it is, madam - h
e was a good father, because - although - I lost my mother when I was three, he put my name on the register. Or I shouldn't have got a birthday - card. See? I had a birthday card from the Queen. You wouldn't have got that if my name hadn't have been in So
merset House. He done that. That's a good deed on his part.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would he buy you a birthday present when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I didn't know it - didn't take much notice of it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Christmas? What did you all do at Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Worked. Had to work. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father had the shop open on Christmas Day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Much as he could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have a special Christmas dinner or anything, can you remember that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I don't think so. Oh yes, I think he would have left - he went in 
a - a raffle once. And I think he got a - well I'm sure he got - a chicken, see. I remember roasting it in front of the fire. You see, I had to - put the fat on it. Turn it round. Get it cooked in front of the fire. See? This chicken. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have Christmas puddings? Things like Christmas pudding and Christmas cake?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I don't think we did. I don't think he could afford it. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember what Chapel Street looked like at Christmas, was it very jolly and lots of festivity around?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 There was only about half the shops there there was then. Yes. Only half the shops.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about the market stalls?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh they come in years later.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The market came much later did it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 There wasn't - many shops there like there is. See, they've gradually got - busy you see and it's like it is now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you play a musical instrument, you said your father played the violin, could you play anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, couldn't play anything. Couldn't play a tin whistle. But my brother, he could - he could play a flute. And -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to make music together at home, would your father play to you?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He used to play for music. The - violin - and a cornet, he could blow a cornet and all. Yes. Well they done that in them days. So he was pre
tty - pretty well off his parents I reckon, but he didn't see much of them, you see, they passed way - when he got married you see. Oh he was a good - good musician.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you sing at all in your family, did anyone sing, did you used to sing together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well, didn't have no time much, it's all work. Get what we could. No. Well they wouldn't let me - if he had any company you see, he wouldn't let me be up then. You go to bed.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he ever play any games with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Sometimes he used to have a game with some customers he might. Perhaps Christmas perhaps, ay.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would they do, what would they play?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - play for money.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Play cards?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cards.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember doing that yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I was - I didn't - I've done a bit of it
 but not much. Because - he says to me once - your hands are all copper - coppery. He said, you mustn't do it. I didn't do it. Didn't do it no more, done it once. He said, don't do it, and I wouldn't do it. I finished it. Satisfy him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any books in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No books very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any newspapers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. No, we had no time for reading. No time for reading, getting any books. No newspapers or that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No magazines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Daily Chronicle used to be ha'penny.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he ever read the paper?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well he used to - try and get one, might have had one brought in. Oh he was a good scholar. He used to play the music. Yes. He made me a suit of clothes to go away with. Well you see - trousers ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t so easy to make. And the coat wa
s a coat like - like this but - just round there like that see, like a piece - piece of cloth - with the buttons round the - the - buttonhole to put it in. No - like used to have what they call a - a turkey - a turkey eye. Ever seen 'em? A turkey eye? Oh 
w
ell a bit iron they had, it was a heavy steel iron. Used to iron the clothes with that. For us. He did. With this steel - steel - what you call 'em - you know what you - the - the irons, the hot irons, yes. He had one of them. Oh he - well he had to do so
mething in his spare time see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember any funerals in your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Funerals? No, I don't remember 'em, 'cos I was very young mind. But I'll tell you what they used to do. They used to come in to him in his shop - and ask him to shave a d
ead man. He used to go and shave 'em. Then the Irish used to come and knock him up - to bail him out, bail the - men that's took up for being drunk. He used to get them out on bail, my father. Mm. Mm, shaved dead man and all you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he mind doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. No. No. But my brother went there - to do one - he wouldn't do it, he rushed away. My father wouldn't mind, he'd go and shave a dead man - when they come for him. He would. 'Cos the Irish used to have 'em shaved you see. Before they put hi
m in the coffin. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there many Irish round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Irish courts where the Angel is. Know the Angel don't you? Round there, in Upper Street. Well right opposite there was courts. All the Irish lived in houses down them courts, they done 
away with the courts. Yes. Most of our customers was Irish. From them courts.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sorts of jobs would those Irish people do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Anything. Almost anything. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were they mostly Roman Catholics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Well if they got - if you got a quid a w
eek there you was lucky in them days. Working for a - barber or that. Much as they had to keep theirselves going.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go out visiting people when you were young, do you remember being taken out to visit friends or neighbours?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No time. No time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't have any relatives who lived nearby?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Had to stop in the home. No time to go out.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But your father would take you out for walks sometimes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He couldn't, see, he was too stout. I had to me own place. 'Cos he was so very stout.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about on Bank Holidays, would the shop be shut on those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Used to have to be open. Mm, they had no time - for any recreation.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever take a holiday, did you and your father ever go away on a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We couldn't
, see, he was very stout, he couldn't play about, no. We took him to a theatre, and he says, you go on - I'm going, he walked from Oxton to - Chapel Street. I know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you do on Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do - do you want a light? I'll put it on. All right? Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Saturdays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you do on a Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well this is our busy day.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You really helped in the shop on that day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to help in the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Sunday, any different Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes
. All day Sundays from nine o'clock. I used to go to work, earn five shillings you see a week. Come home and help him in the shop. From six or seven o'clock 'til ten o'clock at night. Twelve o'clock Saturday. Nine o'clock Sunday. All day. Had your meals w
hen you can.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to church when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Had no time. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So really for you Saturdays and Sundays were the same as other days of the week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. No time - shop every time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was your father a religious man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. I never hear him swear. No. No. They don't swear like they do now. They used to swear shocking them people.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you say grace in your house before meals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to say prayers at night when you were a little boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was your father interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. I don't remember him voting. He used to know politics 'cos he was what they call a good scholar.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you know what party he'd vote for? Do know what his political views were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I couldn't exactly tell you that being young. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You don't know if he was a Liberal or a Conservative? Did men used to come into the barbers shop and talk about politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Of course that's how you kept your customers. Two used to be lined up, th
ree Saturday or Sunday - 'course they get in conservation you see, they didn't mind stopping. Now if you go in a barbers shop wants a - out you go. But what a difference. Three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 pence the most for a haircut. And they charge you three shillings, three and si
x and four shillings. To have your hair cut. And they don't want to shave you. Do you know that? Ay? Did you know a barbers shop doing away with shaving? Ay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't suppose they do many shaves now do they?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. And 'they say it's hard work shavi
ng. Mm. Well they charge two shillings and eighteen pence for to shave - I can't see what it - well I went into a shop in Brighton - see? And the barbers shop. Said, do you mind shaving me? He said, no. And the man was doing no work. In Brighton they tell
 me they never have any shop shave there. But I managed to find one. So of course I shaved myself. They wants to shave yourself here every day. I've done it every day for about ten years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was your father a good barber, would you say he was good at his job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you good at it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Mm. But I didn't learn it much. I didn't like it, see. I couldn't get on with it. So I went in the printing. He done his hardest to keep me - at it, but - I told him, dad, I can't do it. So he let me go - in
 printing. Of course he'd got two - two of his - sons - was barbers, and he wanted me to be one. I couldn't do it. Didn't want to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You followed your other two brothers into printing did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh they was a lot old - years older than me.
 About fifty - or - about fourteen to fifteen older than what I was. I was only a youngster, see. They was very old they was. I was only a boy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father ever have any spare time outside the shop, did he ever have any spare time of his own?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
None at all. All he had to do - was the least in the week part - weeknights, ten o'clock you see, he always - he used to do was to go the public house and have a drink. That's the only time he had, he'd got to stop in his shop, wait for customers see. He 
}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 dare}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 n't shut. No, he never had no spare time at all for himself. And always had to be at the mercy of the customers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he have any special friends who'd come to visit him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - not many then. They couldn't afford it. They couldn't afford it you know. Parents couldn't afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father go to any clubs, you say he went out for a drink?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He'd go to a club now and again?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Sometimes he'd go to the club. North London, there be - Hen - Henry Street. He'd go to the 
club there. When he had a chance and of course it was late before he come home see. Used to go there when the shop was shut. Ten o'clock see. He'd go into that club. That's done away with now that club, Henry Street it was. North London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So he didn't have time to do any sports or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you paid by your father at all when you helped him in the shop when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I went to what they call - a stationers. I used to - when I - when I got there I stuck to that trade, see. 
And I was twenty-five years - with that trade. At the Educational Supply Association. They used to be in Shoe Lane. Then they moved to - somewhere down in the country see. How I lost me twenty-five bob was - the 14 war was on, see. And all the work, 'cos 
I
 used to help like to put the sheets in a machine, see - that used to - they lost the contract there for - lost my job - and - so I joined the Army when I was forty-five. See? Kitchener didn't call the men up - 'cos the forty-five's wasn't called. He said
,
 you've got to get a job. Well - in Shoe Lane in Farringdon there is Spar Fields they call it. I used to go three or four nights a week. In fact I was working in Finsbury Square, with a man's job, as a ruler, machine ruler, that's what my trade was. I say
s
 to 'em, look here, I says, could you let me get away one - couple - well I think I said one - but I'll say two minutes, so as I can catch a train to get at the fields - Spar Fields I says, to do my drill? Four nights a week. The man that drilled us there
 says - I'll take - make - take four stone off you men - by making you do your drill. So I used to do me weeks work, and four nights a week at Spar Fields. I was six years - in the 21st Middlesex - why I was doing that you see, and - yes, six years.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What were the hours of your first job when you started at the printing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Two o'clock Saturdays you had. I went - I worked at a place where I had to go to a public house to get me wages, I did, on the Saturday. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What time would you start in the morning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 About eight. Eight o'clock.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 At what time would you finish?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 About six. About six. Saturdays two o'clock.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No Sundays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No Sunday work. Outside - only - only at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you get this job, did you get it yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I got it meself. Yes, I got it meself, yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you see it advertised?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No, I didn't see it advertised - and - one of the men must have had - and I got a job with him there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you have to do in this job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - you know account books and ledgers don't you? You got lines on 'em ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
t you? You know, columns. Well them days they had different colours for different columns you see. See what I mean? They'd say - so and so, that's got to be - that's - that's right. And
 - that'd be a different - coloured line there. And whosoever - machine - had a long - long - long bit of wood with three - three different colours in it. Well I used to do all them colours. Them lines, for their - for their account books, and we went dow
n
 - all nibs, pen like - pens they was, they was all - along - long - long - slide they call it there, three sections in it, see? This be red in there, blue in there and - other colour in there, I used to do them. By turning, see? So at the finish I got a 
-
 a gas - a gas, worked be gas you see. Instead of me turning the handle - it was a big machine, wooden machine. Perhaps you don't know of 'em, seen 'em in museums. Well it's a book - what - like you used to have - you have on ledgers, was all columns in i
t
, what you put it in. Well some of them have got different colours. They're all printed now. Same colour. Then I used to have red, white, as the saying is, and blue. In fact - I've got what they call white ink. Yes. White ink. Blue and all that. I used to
 
- have a - a double at the top, and a single underneath, and these lines go dead on that. Mustn't go above it. Must go dead on it. I used to make 'em meself, the pens. Like they what they call pens. Used to put 'em in these slides you see what I mean, and
 
you used to put a bit of wool round it you see, and a bit of flannel like - well about from here - twenty - well - thirty inches I think the machine. This is what I've had. I've had a lot over on the machine, and do what they call a - elephant - or a doub
le elephant sheet, I've had 'em as long that. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any holidays with pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No holidays. Never thought of holidays at school. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you first started working, did you get any paid holidays?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 None. None. No. No. For years I never got paid. One of these machine rulers I run piece work. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What were you paid at first, when you first went there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I think I got thirty bob a week. Twenty-five to thirty bob a week, I got. Yes. Yes, I was twenty-five year
s at one - one - firm, big firm done all the school work. See? Done all the school work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you think twenty-five shillings was a fair wage, was that quite good?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 It was. Yes. Was them days. Yes. Twenty-five, I should think it was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you married by this time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh yes. Mm. Wife, she never went to work. They didn't go out to work them days. No. The husband had to do all the work. They stopped at home doing the washing for the - children and keeping the house tidy.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you get on with the people you worked with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well, they got jealous you see, they wouldn't help - tell you anything, if you was in a bit of a - bit of a puzzle. Oh is this all right? So and so'll tell me. Mm, jealous. Didn't want to see you get on. I went to a j
ob once, a man says - oh - I can see some of us getting the sack - the sack you coming here. I said, look here, I don't care what you say, I'm the last in and I'll be the first out. The foreman said, what are you leaving for? Well I says, can't you see th
at man there - says I'd - be getting him lose his job. So to stop his talk - I'm leaving you. Well, he said, you ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
t - I said, oh yes I am, I said, I'm leaving you, he can keep his job. They used to - sneak one another's jobs them days. Well it - makes them do it wouldn't it, hard up. Being hard up makes 'em do it wouldn't it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did your employer treat you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - he done all right. But as I got older - a man say, well - that man done that job. You might do it quicker. I said, look here - if I do
 that job I shan't do it no quicker, 'cos I done it the same time and that chap - I said, never mind, do it. See, after one another's job. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you think about this man who employed you? What was he like as a man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I didn't like him. They
 was jealous of one another, they was frightened of one - another - they'd lose their job. 'Cos it was hard to get you know. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What was the employer like as a man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 All right. My employers a very nice man. Mm. The school were. Aint in some of the jobs. Oh no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's the only job you did before you went in the army was it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Yes. I had to go - because I lost the job after twenty-five years, 'cos of the army. '14 army. Forty-five I was. Mm. I - I joined at Finsbury Town Hall, in Exmou
th Street there, in Farringdon Road. Mm. Well I couldn't get no work. And when I used to do the four nights a week - I used to - see, you could rush it in, you'd say, well let me have the couple - finish off for six I had a - rush to get a train - a bus o
r
 a tram - and - I used to - have to take me rifle - to - to work with me, 'cos I was doing four nights - work - used to get there about - about half past six, and - used to take the rifle with me, and do these four nights - four nights a week Spar Fields.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you do when you came out of the army?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When I came out of the army, I got - I got different jobs. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of jobs did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Same work. Same - same work. 'Course the men that worked there is joining the army you see, I t
ook their place. I think I worked up - between seventy and eighty. Different jobs and - the last job I had was in Covent Garden. There's a big firm there. I forget now what it was, I know there's \{BLANK\} that's a good firm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So after you came out of the army you went into another of these printing jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's it, same work. Same work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go to several firms or stay in the same one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you know I - in - I - do you know Moorfields don't you? I'm - I'm supposed to be there you see, and
 the last time I went they said you've got to wait four months or ten months, to get the job. Me - me glasses. I want a pair of these glasses. 'Cos your eyesight - lucky for your eyesight to be like - 'cos it was always testing my eyes like - on the rulin
g machine, 'cos got to stop dead on the top line. No - nothing a - above it. 'cos they wouldn't have it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 A great strain on the eyes isn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever do any other job besides the printing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. I went into it. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you retire from that? Was that the last job you did, you went right through all your life doing these printing jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm. Yes, I - I had to give it up - I'm not sure whether it was much over seventy - I had to - you know, because the war was 
over and all that you see. So I had to take what I - me pension. You see? They used to give us - eight shillings a week you see. What they call a Machine Rulers Society. Just for a few weeks. So at the finish of course I had to - pack it up altogether.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you rather have done any other type of job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. I had two brothers barbers. One like - one printing, and me, my work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have to do any training for your job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I trained myself. The better you was the better you'd get on. I d
on't know whether it was a quid or twenty-five shillings I got. I'm not sure. I know it was over a quid or a quid.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You said a Machine Rulers Association?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was that a trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I - joined the trade union 1901. I was. But - wh
en I got - lost me job at the Educational you see - I didn't - you know, I think - that would have put me right for that - years I worked there, I didn't pay no contributions you see. But I rejoined, see. Well I was that twenty-five years short.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You rejoined after the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
So - now - it's a - I should think it's - what they call the Papers Workers Union, I think there'd two or three thousand in it. They've dropped the pension - took it right away, because the men wouldn't pay a penny or tuppence more. There you are.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to union meetings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I used to be on the committee. You know.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did they do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 On the committee. To - to try all the cases that was in - in - in the trade. They done certain things, they had to g
o before the committee. I was on the committee. Three.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever have any strikes in your trade?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, I had one once. Laid off me job over it. 'Cos they wouldn't take so many back. Strike.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How much would you pay a week in those days to belong to your trade union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Sixpence. Sixpence - in the union. That's for a man paying sixpence. If it was - every week. If you didn't pay you'd be scratched out the union. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have to join the union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well you - not exactly. But - I th
ink it's the only way to get a job. 'Cos there used to be some females do the work the same. See? I worked with a female when I was - female doing the same work you see. But nowadays they won't let a female do any of that work now. Oh no. Still going stro
ng. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did the women get the same pay as the men for doing the same job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I couldn't tell you, I don't - I don't think so. See the machine I had - was when I was ruling out, I had a - girl putting the sheets, in, and the girl taking the sheets
 out. See? And she used to lay 'em there - used to lay 'em there and there and there and there - so as they'd dry, you see, 'cos they was wet with ink. See? I was a putter in at first. And then I was a taker off. And then a putter in, then - got to - almo
st apprentice job, and dre}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 w then. At Moorfields there, app}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 rentice}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 nts}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
hips there, took a man fourteen months before to get his eye glasses. Told me four months and ten months. But some people get there. Cos it's like a theatre. Stacks of - stacks of - seats all the way along.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 It's a good place isn't it, a very good hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I know it is. Look here - I've been to two opticians, and why - I was silly enough to pay four pounds five and six, before I got the glasses. Well when I got the glasses, do you 
see, they wasn't a patch on what I had before. I couldn't get no reading on it. Twice I went there. And they said, you'll have to go to Moorfield. To Doctor Tomlin. So that's the third optician - to go the read - glasses. Mm. Oh it was nothing - here - do
 you know when I went to Moorfields, they was puzzled to have a man over a hundred coming out. See the fuss. See the fuss they made. Oh there's a man here a hundred. Or hundred and one, yes. Hundred and one. Bot hold of me arm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you started workin
g, do you think there was any differences of interest between workers, would you say that there was a difference between trained craftsmen and other workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. All jealous of one another. They wouldn't tell anybody anything. Oh go and find out
. 'Cos ours was tricky work you know. All eyesight work. Different colours. And you'd got to do it in a certain time. Don't forget. I - what - you don't know what elephant paper is do you? Well. My - my sheets went out - used to go right down to the - squ
are - floor, bins - I used to lift all of them up and that and put 'em on the machine. Elephant paper. It was hard work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you think that there was a difference between people who served an apprenticeship and people who were ordinary workers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. I'd sooner not be apprentice. You go from shop to shop and learn. Each shop's got a different kind. See? So apprentices only got one type. I was pleased I wasn't apprenticed. 'Cos I could shift where I liked. You can do so and so, well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you think apprentices thought they were better than other workers? Would a craftsman think that he was superior to another worker?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh there is some - there is some - oh - born in 'em. Oh that's born in 'em. Oh some born in 'em, I'll admit that. Oh there wa
s cleverer men than me at it. Oh I'm not saying I was a clever man. I just do me share. Well I must have done - pretty well to have been twenty-five years at a place.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would a craftsman think that his work was more valuable than a labourer's work at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well - no, I don't - no. Because a man had to have a good eyesight, and a good way of doing the job. When another man's got his - eyesight properly, like doing stairs and all that if they're a carpenter.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you think that when you started work it changed your attitude towards life at all, once you started earning money?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I had to look after the wife, the children. The four children. Sometimes - well the work - look here - I was working in a job - and they should have stopped me twelv
e and six a week. So I get the sack on the job 'cos they're moving to the country. Well - moving to the country, and getting that job you see - that - I was getting a - I know it make a difference to my job, I know, moving.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you say you got the sack before you got married, what job was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Same job. Same job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That was a machine rulers job in a different firm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And then you went and got another job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's right. Quite right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Same pay?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Always the same trade right through. Well from 1901 to '70, I had how much - about sixty years of it didn't I. Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You went on living at home when you left school didn't you, you went on living with your father when you left school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Oh I had to to help him. Oh I must help. I'm glad I did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So how many years did you help in the shop for before you got a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well you see he died when I was twenty - twenty-one. See? And I was right up hoping to get married. I got married about a few weeks after 
he was buried.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you worked with him for about eight years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 A long while. A long while. I worked with him from twelve - twelve 'til about twenty. Oh, it's about eight years isn't it. That's right.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you helped your father did you have the same relationship with him, you still got on well with your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes. See we didn't have much time for sport. Had to go on your own. For a couple of hours. Not much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was your other brother working in the shop as well as you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. He was helping my father. 'Course when my father died he had the shop and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So there was three of you in the shop was there?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes, he had everything he did. My brother, the shop and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was there enough work in the shop for three of you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Well there was when - when father was alive. I used to - have to put drops in his eyes. Rheumatics in his eyes. And his hands - and his legs, he had to put - put his foot on the rails of the - chair after I lathered a m
an. Oh he did suffer with the rheumatism. He's put potatoes in his pocket, they say that does you good. They went as hard as stone. Mm. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Sundays, did you spend Sundays the same once you left school and you started helping your father in the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to a Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. Yes. I think we used to go, I think there was a little place at the top. Well they - they was a bit hard on you if you didn't go to Sunday school and it was a disaster. Don't forget 
- you had to go to the school - of a Sunday. See, youngsters. Yes. Here they've no need to go to school at all have they, they forced you there. Aint you been to Sunday school? You go to Sunday school or you get the cane - if you don't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They used to say that at school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of Sunday school was it, a church of England or a chapel Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. It's kind of a chapel. Mm. Top of the turning where I lived. I lived for fifty years in Wharfdale Road. In Wharfdale Road.
 You know round that way, Wharfdale Road, I - I lived there fifty years, I was at work at the time - but the wife died. Me, I had to get out. She was eighty seven. And I was pleased, she went before me. She went in the fifty years as I'd been there. Other
wise, we'd both had to gone out - and looked for a place. Which was only one of you - you had a chance.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you work on Sundays once you left school, you worked in the shop on a Sunday did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, all day 'til nine o'clock. Didn't stop for food.
 Had to wait 'til the shop was half empty. In fact I've had the chimney alight - some Sundays when - the shops full of customers. He wouldn't have a sweep. You could get a sweep those days for a sixpence. In fact he had a customer - a sweep. But he didn't
 like cleaning the mess up, see? So he let it catch fire.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How about politics when you were a young man, were you interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, I think I was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you belong to a political party at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you remember voting in any elections when you were a young man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, I took a interest. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you vote for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, there was only Tories and - Liberals then. See? No Labour then. So of course naturally I worked the Labour - the - Liberals. Mm.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever help them at election times, the Liberals?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I didn't, no. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But you did vote for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 See I was tied up with the work. Tied up in the night then. See, if I had plenty of time - I may have joined one of them see. But I w
asn't doing - I was helping him. I'm pleased I done it. And I'm pleased my wife went - when I had to get out of Willow Place and I'd been there fifty years. She passed away there. That was when I was about - eighty-nine. Or between eighty-nine and ninety.
 'Cos I was ninety-one before I went - to the home, where I am.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go out in the evenings at all once you'd started working in the shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 With the wife, I used to go out then. Music hall. But I didn't when I was at home, single. When I wa
s married and - I used to spend about - well, close on half a quid. And I used to go to the music hall. I - I used to go to the Middlesex in Drury Lane. Yes. I used to take the wife out. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So what would interest you, apart from in the shop when you 
had to work, did you do anything at all with your spare time? You didn't have any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Didn't have none spare - didn't think of any. See me - father took anything up that was spare time then. I had to sit there and wait.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any friends at that time who'd come in and see you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, they did used to talk to my father. See, in the shop while they're waiting to have their - shave or haircut. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any friends who'd come in to see you of your age?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Couldn't have. No. No, my interests - father all the time. Took -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any girlfriends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Time to do it. No. I know my father's - why don't you tell your brother to give that woman up? I said, he can't, he won't. Well it's a good job my father had me. He took a lot of worry off him. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father know the girl you were going to marry?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. She used to hang about for him. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you take her home with you, you took her home to you're your father did you? The girl you later married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He got everything, my brother. He put - he as good as kicked me out. So - soon as my father went.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you take your girlfriend home to meet your father, the girl you married, did your father know her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I - I wish I did because I was keeping it private see. I wish I had. He was a good man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So he never met her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't think he did, no.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have to be home by a certain time when you were a young man would your father expect you to be in at a certain time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The shop'd be always open then. Twelve o'clock Saturdays. Sunday and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you were twenty-one when you got married were you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I - well I didn't want him to know I was caught, see, why I didn't bring her round. In fact I wasn't courting long to get -
 to do it. I wish I had have shown her to him. He'd have been very pleased.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long did you know the person who became your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I should think about twelve months. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you meet her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I think I went to Worlds Fair - in the Agricultural Hall, and I - met her there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father ever take part in any sports?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Do what? In sport, yes. The bound - the bounder went to a club - one day - and to his surprise, he - one of his sons was there. Suppose father - see th
ere wasn't much to do, so he used to go in a club, see, in the afternoon for a few hours, and sometimes he'd - leave me in the shop and go - to a racecourse. He was only fifty-six, but a nice man.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he used to bet on horses at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you later on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Do you know when I left off? Well when I - when the buses - when the - when the - Government you know put a tax on the bookies. I had five and six to come you see and - and five of that shillings was me own betting money, I w
on sixpence. I'm looking at it - and the bookie said, what are you looking at? Oh I said, you've stopped me tuppence out of five and six. I've never done a bet - at all since. And I'm better for it. You see what I mean? I - used to bet a lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father belong to any savings clubs at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No, I don't think he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He didn't belong to a boot club or a sick club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I couldn't tell you for sure you see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did he have any insurance for funerals do you think?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, he insured
 me. Oh yes. And he registered me. When he was there without my wife - my mother. Oh he was a very good - he put everything right for me. He done his hardest to get me to be a barber, I couldn't do it. I left home. 'Cos he forced me. He soon come and brou
ght me back, he says, all right. I'll let you have your own way.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I think you said you didn't get on very well with your brother?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Dirty man. Used to go with prostitutes. The one - older than me. Yes. Well my father says, Charlie - calls me - he sa
ys, tell him not to have that woman what he's having connection with. I said, I can't, he won't. And look here - I told you I think about the policeman getting me - you know - now look here, I can tell you this - he had the cheek to let his wife come in b
e
d between me and him. He's a dirty man. He used to always go with prostitutes. And he was no more than three or four year older than me. You don't know what happened. I'm telling you God's truth as the judge above - God above. Fancy letting a woman sleep 
in - oh well would have - would have done something with him I believe. He never -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father would have been upset?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about your older brother, did you like him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I liked two of 'em. But - when they was out of work they us
ed to come and play on me to try and get money out of me. Yet - they was older than me mind you. But I couldn't give 'em much you see, I'm only just earning certain amount.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Especially as you married shortly afterwards, you had your own home didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. They didn't care. They used to back horses and all that, see, and they lost their business.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who would you play with when you were a child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When I was a youngster we used to play all different games do you see. And used to fight one an
other you see. When we were youngsters. Round about thirteen or there, and I went in the barbers shop, the shop was full of customers, my father says, well Charlie, I don't mind you fighting, but you've got your shirt - shirt sleeves torn.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you play with any neighbours children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Lots - lots. We used - used to tie a string - to a tea - tea pa - a house tea paper, used to tie a bit of string, be round the corner to see if anybody picked it up. And used to be a little passage up Chapel Street
 - house that - house that side, house that side. We used to tie a string to that one - tie - and - put the other into the - so they wouldn't open the door it'd make the bell ring. But picked up for taking some bacon from Chapel Street.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You had a good time when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. While - father was alive see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you allowed to get dirty when you played?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would your father complain if you got your clothes dirty?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - no, he didn't - well didn't - 'cos I told yo
u he made my clothes. And do you know - once when I was a youngster we went down Duncan Terrace in Oxford Street, and they used to keep sheep on the field. We used to try and get on their backs, you see, the sheep. Well - a man come out that belonged to t
he sheep in the field, he set a dog on me. And I got two - two bites right up there, from the dog, of course }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 he - pushed me down and bit me al}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 l up me leg. Mm. My father summonsed the man. He was very good, he summonsed him. When he went up for the summons t
hey said, the case had all been settled. Got nothing. There you are. Dirty trick who run it, got the case settled, the governor must have tipped you know, tipped the people in - touch with it. Quite plain.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could you play with anyone you wanted, did your father let you play with any boys you wanted to?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well he didn't have time to stop me you see, he didn't see what - any action - I used to play with the boys in Chapel Street, these men that lived there see. We used to all get together, go to differ
ent plays you know what boys are. Snowball in there, and used to say, go on, get away, you'll break my windows.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father didn't discourage you from playing with certain children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. He - no, oh no, I can play with anybody.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever belong to any youth clubs of any sort?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you belong to any youth organisations?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. Not then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They didn't have many in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, we didn't, no. Was happy enough without - troubling like that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you do in your spare time? Did you have any hobbies when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well to tell you the truth I had no chance. I used to be in the shop 'til ten o'clock at night, twelve o'clock all day Sunday - all day Saturday and nine o'clock all day Sunday. Have your food when you can get the chance and no customers.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you didn't have time to collect stamps?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How about, did you ever keep any pets?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. My father had pigeons. And rabbits.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you interested in them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He used - he used to have that - I didn't have much interest in 'em. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go out fishing?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Fishing? I don't know, I forget now. When I went out - must have gone out fishing, I must. Sure - 'course I went near the water was when I went to field
 in - Duncan Terrace. There used to be a field with sheep. And the water was there and all, see, the canal.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go out for walks quite a lot, you'd go out for walks with friends would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - what - I think so. Yes. I had a son - I went to 
look for him and - he's walking all the way from Kings Cross to Hampstead. I see him coming along and met him at - up near the - near Hampstead it was, I picked him up, I said, here, you don't want four or five more boys - walking. I've seen a bit of life
. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever have a bicycle?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Bicycle? No I never had a bicycle. Couldn't afford one the old chap. See he only had a penny for a shave every week. That's all. See? So when the old chap used to say you can't pay me, oh, he said, well you can't
 stick in on can you? He says, no. Used to get on - 'course them was rough days you know. You must have had a penny. They used to knock him up to bail the Irish out, that got locked up for being drunk. Ten or eleven or twelve at night. Used to shave dead 
people and all. Oh he had some pluck. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever take part in any sports when you were a boy? Did they play any sports at all?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, only playing with one another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you play football, anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't think there was football thought much of then. Them days. No. We might have done up - Chapel Street.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to the theatre, or to the music hall when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I went to Britannia once and once only with the old chap. And we walked all the way
 from - from - a turning off Pitfield Street, and the old chap said, well you two boys go along. He said, I can't go as quick as you. So we went on and got tea or something ready for the old chap - when he come in. Oh he was nice man. He was. Well I tell 
you I waited these three months for him. I should never have forget myself, if I hadn't have stopped that three months before I got married. Oh God Almighty. And he thought a lot of me when I did it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to the cinema when you were a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. That's the only time I went to what you call entertainment, was the theatre. Mm. Pitfields. I had plenty of time, you know, what I spend at home what we did have. - No, I never went to the pictures. Might have gone to a penny panorama. Oh I wen
t to that in John Street Road. Yes. That's where I had the television now. And you couldn't hear 'em talk. And moving. Used to be a penny to go there. And we was lucky to have a penny too then. To go and pay it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you get any pocket money every week?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. No. I had everything I wanted, I didn't trouble him. Oh I was his pet. And I wasn't spoilt. As I told you once, I says, my brothers used to fight me. I said, you stop talking about fighting me - while your father's here. So my father said, you w
as a good boy. You wouldn't do it. While I was there. He says, you might have given him a good hiding but I'm pleased you never done it while I was there. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So nobody ever helped your father look after the house, he didn't have any relations who came in to help look after the house at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well bad relations he did.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They didn't come in to help you though in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She was a strange - he got a stranger to - helped him - do the laundry. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If your father was ever ill or an
ything who would look after you? Would anyone come in to look after you when you were a little boy if your father was ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I was always - always doing something, like - playing or - or working. Five shillings - a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever know any of your relatives?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any of your relations, did you know them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
The bound - bounders never come to see us much. Yes, he had sisters - that was married. Yes, he had sisters who were married and sons that were married, but they never come to see him.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go to see them at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No, I couldn't go. Well the only time I went there was a baby once I had in me arms, to see 'em once. They was looking after their old mother. Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about friends, did your father have any friends who came in to see him?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
They used to like him very much, but of course - look here - if any stranger come to see him you see - what I mean - who was going to talk about different things, I used to have to go on the stairs to listen, 'cos he wo
uldn't let me be in their company while they was talking. He wouldn't. He was very very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He protected you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He was very good. He brought me up well. And I took - and I done it, what he said. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And his friends would come and talk to him in the shop would they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 While he was working?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's right, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were friends ever invited into your home, did friends ever come into your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - full - full up with their work you see, to have time to come much see. They had no time then, it's all work. Very little money.

\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about at Christmas, would friends come in at Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh he used to have a Christmas box at - up - remember the lather boy. He used to put a box up. Oh he was very good to me. He mad
e me clothes and all. Not shirts, he couldn't do them. That's over eighty years ago.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
In those days would people come into your house without an invitation or would they have to be invited? Did people ever drop by just to see your father?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 To tell you the truth I didn't have much time to go to see 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father didn't have much time to go out and visit people did he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. He used to have a - he used to have a bit of sport in the clubs in the middle of the week. When there was no customer
s. All the afternoon nobody ever in shave or haircut, see. Well I've have to - had to wait to - a Sunday's dinner before a shave and haircut come. See? Rough times then you know. And I tell you I was out to work when I got married. I says to wife, you sto
p
 with your people, I - I'll manage. But she says - she says, no, we'll go right; through. I tell you my brother what I told you what a dirty man he was - he used to - shut that shop and stop me from going out as I told you. Dirty type. And I wasn't much m
ore than twenty. No. That's when my father died, he done it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember much about when you went to school in those days, how old were you when you started going?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I was twelve when I left, and I waited 'til the school was being built in Lyon
s Street. Before that I went to a free school at the Angel. It was a kind of a - what they call a church - religious affair you see. The Irish used to go there and no boots and socks on some of them. It was a free school - while they was building the one 
at Lyons Street, see. What the fiddle was was - well it's over ninety years ago nearly ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t it. You know. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How old were you when you started school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What? I was waiting - well - I went there, I should think I was about four or five, I must ha
ve been, yes. Was there 'til I was twelve. I left at - had nothing else to do like see. So passed. I tell you what, I had a drawing once to do do you see. And I only had it half done, you see, the drawing. I said, well - I won't get nothing. Shocked me 'c
o
s I got a book. You know why? They'd finished their - the picture they was drawing on this sheet. I had mine half - fine, not thick, just fine. They got me a book. And I'm telling the Gawd's truth they used to put my writing up on the wall, for a copy the
 children. And I used to get the pens and the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \endash }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  what}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 
\rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
name in a box, go up the steps and give it to the children. Once I was in a - in a line. I was just silly for I - I knew things but wouldn't say 'em. So we're standing all in a long line, they says, so 
and so, so and so. I in me mind I had degrees. At the finish I brought it out. I said, degrees. I got - top - top - boy. Oh I had it in me you know to - you know, the sense. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What time would you go to school in those days, what time would you start?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I daresay it was the same time as now almost. Same time I believe.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you'd finish in the afternoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 About three o'clock or something?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What kind of school was it, you said your first school was a church school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
A board school. I had to wait, it was being built - before I could go in. In Lyons Street. A board school. I used to pay a penny or tuppence when I went there. Yes. Free school you pay nothing.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How old were you when you went to the board school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
When I first went to school I should think I was about - four or five, but I went to that school then at the Angel - I daresay I went when I was about - oh might have gone - eight, nine or ten.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You'd been at the free school about three years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's right. See, the school must have been built in two or three years. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How near was it to you, did you live near the free school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. There's Chapel Street there. Where the school is in Suffolk Street - is the school. Well - i
t's like going from here to - you know, away up the road, not far.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So it didn't take long to get there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I walked there, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was the board school quite near?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, it was the board school that was near. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was the free school near your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No, that was at - yes, near the Angel. See - see - Chapel Street, across the road there you see, there is the free school. And I lived in Chapel Street. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go by yourself when you were a little boy to the free school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Or did your father take you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
You - you knew your way, I used to go to the - I used to go to the - he used - there a place where they - sold the milk. I used to go there for skimmed milk. And I've been to - up Chapel Street there's a
 turning - where there's a milk place, you see, they had the cows there, and you could get the fresh milk there - in the little turning in Chapel Street. Yes. Get the fresh milk then. And skimmed milk there by the Angel. Couldn't get the skimmed milk othe
r than that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you have your midday meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Indoors.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You came home from school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I was - I was - it was only a little way to go. See? I was there in a few minutes you see to get me dinner. Well it was - might have been - bit of fish
 or - or something else. I know once - supper time, the old chap - you know, I used to like pease pudding, see, and - I think I had a baked potato - so my father - being a child, like a bit of that pease pud - I gave him some. Pease pudding.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you think of school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well, I - I liked it all right. I did. Yes. I liked school all right. Nice school, decent teacher. I used to have the cane mind you. Sometimes I was a bit late you see, and I used to stand in the line - before I went into the scho
ol, see. About nine o'clock I should think it was. And I've had the cane on me hand. Hold your hand out for the cane 'cos I was late for school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you feel about the teachers? What were the teachers like?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 All right. I'll bet they're better
 now than now. 'Course there wasn't so many school - children about then see. They - they could do their best for 'em. Teach 'em - to read and write all right. With 'em.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did the teachers used to say that certain things were important, like manners and tidiness, did they used to talk about this?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh you behaved yourself in school. Yes. You didn't take no liberties in school. You had to keep to - the right - the right thing. You know they had their eye on all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you had to be punctual?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes, I was - I had to behave myself. I did, I behaved myself. I had a - good father and - and he put it in me - to be good. Yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did the teachers used to ....?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Tell people about how to speak properly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. You could speak yourself properly. No - didn't want no teaching like now. Now they're little bounders you know. Not now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If you did something the teachers disapproved of what would happen?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. All we had to do was say where the map was - and, yes, everything all right. Just nice. No trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did they punish children, would they cane them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
There was nothing much to punish hardly you see. There wasn't so many in the school. All I had was the cane for being late to go to school, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But the children were well behaved and did lessons properly?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes, they was well behaved because - not such a lot in it you see, I don't suppose much more than thirty children in the - altogether with the teachers. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father - was he interested in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 In - in the school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was your father interested in your school work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh he see that I was all right, he was a good scholar himself, he come from a good family but - was poor. He could play the cornet. He could play the violin
. They took a violin to him once, he put it together - and used to play it. High music. Music he used to play it. Yes. Used to mend clocks in the past time. Oh he was very - he was a clever man. As I told you I couldn't play no instruments at all. But he 
could, any. Well when I used to want to go with him to As - he used to go to Ascot - with his shaving kit - to shave people there because there's no barber shop there, used to - he had a friend that was in a tent. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And he used to shave people on the racecourse?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your father ever come up to the school to meet the teachers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Hadn't got no time. No time. This here - this here - dog that bit me - the friend of his - that used to have a tent on a racecourse at Asc}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t was in the shop. 
He made me stand up on a chair in the shop, and he - this friend of his burnt - burnt the bite out. Burnt all the bite. Which was wanting. Because that comes on you, if it isn't burnt. So it was all burnt - by him. That was a bit of luck.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I'll bet that was painful though wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. That was a bit of luck. Yes, made me stand on a barbers chair - full of customers - and he done the job. He used to go there to shave people, no shops there then. Of course it's all over now. I mean I could not go 
to him - when I wanted to go to help him, thought me goodness I'll get a job, and when he's not going to Ascot you see - I'll - I couldn't go to Ascot because I'd got a job to go to you see, I might - my great idea was to go to Ascot to help him - to shav
e people, but I couldn't - 'cos the - I had to get a job - at the time. Oh he was very good he was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did most of the other children at your school come from similar types of home to you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, yes, there was only poorly people. Poorly people. Much 
as they could pay the school money. Yes, used to go to this - there are places there and - not for the - the school money, even a penny. They didn't have a penny to pay - them days. Couldn't afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You say a lot of the Irish children used to go to the school without any shoes on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Yes. That's at the free school at the Angel they was. Shows you how poor they was. There was a lot of - lot of - passages, or a lot of courts there by the Angel, w}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 
here the Irish lived. They dare}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 n't go round then 
because they used to throw things at the policeman - if he went down. And they got some up Essex Road now, there's - there's some kind, I'm not sure.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did the teachers ever pick out some children for different treatment or did they treat all the children the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
He - he - he - he made school - good schoolchildren of them, the teachers. Well they had the time. They've got no time, there's such a lot in the school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If some children were quite poor did they treat them the same as the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, very poor you know. Yes, only poor children. A poor children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And they were all treated the same?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there any gangs or groups in your school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No, I think we got on all - all right together. Yes. Oh
 was a lot of children there them days, they used to have five or six or seven and eight children didn't they, them days. As many children as they liked.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there any children who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there any children at school who were left out of things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. No. No, they all - they - well they went to get 'em to school to - instead of being at home, you know, messing about. So they all went. Used to like to go to school. Yes. Four standards, first, second, third 
and fourth - standards - you done - you done the four standards and - you could go out if you liked. Twelve I went out. Well I was glad to get out to help my father, see. To help to put the lather on the men's face, while he shaved 'em, see. He - he made 
a
 long - a long - what do they call 'em - like a long - long - pole up, all hollow in the middle, and he put some lamps on it what's paraffin lamps, and used to put paraffin in and light the window up. Yes, very good that was. He was a clever man, what you
 call a clever man. I wish I could follow him, I couldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you have liked to have stayed longer at school if you'd had the chance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What? No. No. Well you - you was glad to leave school in a way. Or your parents was for you to earn - help the
m to earn a shilling - or that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go to any evening classes when you left?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any what? No need to. We knew quite enough without going to them. See? Yes, clever enough without having to go to them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If you look back do you have any regrets about your education?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. No. They learnt me to - to be a - what you call a educated boy. See, they had time to do it, and the people wasn't too much there. Oh they used to think a lot of me they did then, I used to get little pens and all that for it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you think you benefited from going to school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm? Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
You said you were about twenty-one when you got married, that means you were married in about 1891 or something like that, how long had you known your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long I know her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh I should think about - eighteen months, two years.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you meet her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We used to go to the music hall every weekend. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you actually meet her the first time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she l
ived close handy to me. She lived in - I think it was in the same turning. Off the - Viner Grove, Wharfdale Road. Yes. We lived in the same turning. It's a turning with no - er - outlet. It's a long turning but - you couldn't go straight through it you se
e. Two houses across. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she come from London, had she always lived in London?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Her mother - was a - a farmer's wife. At Cambridge, Ely. That's where her mother was. And she came to London. With her husband. She couldn't read, she couldn't wri
te. And my wife was very poor - scholar, because there were no schools to force you to school. See? But - she improved greatly. Oh she was a good woman, yes. Yes, we lived in the same turning, I went for her and we - used to have a Christmas you know, our
 - Christmas - jollifications you know of a night time. Yes, oh we - we enjoyed ourselves.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you save up any money before you got married, had you been saving up money before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Had both of you been saving up money before you got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - didn't have much saved, no. Had to save on what I got. We had to live on - no special - prizes. We had to get our money -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your father had died by then hadn't he?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were her parents able to help you at all? Could her parents help you at all when you first got married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Your wife's parents, were they able to help you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, I used to go and see her parents every week. Pas the time away. Well they done their best. Oh yes, I lived there 'til I got work. Mm.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you left your brother's you went to live with them did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Me brother he - he threw me out. Talk about leaving him. No good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long were you actually engaged to your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I should think about - twelve months.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have a white wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She did, I - I -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember your wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - no, I don't - yes, oh - she had a white - oh yes, she come to the wedding and all that, got the wedding ready, her mother. Yes. Oh yes.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you married in a church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. Church across the road here. My daughter was married at the church across the road here that lives at Hastings. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you get any wedding presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes. You ought to - you ought to see what I had for the birthdays then. I don't know if I've got 'em all here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember if you were given any wedding presents at your own wedding? Did you have presents when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 See - they couldn't afford it, he was only a horse keeper. He done his best you see. Oh yes. Oh he done his best.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any guests at the wedding, did you have a party after the wedding?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. Stop up all night. Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you and your wife got on a honeymoon?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Couldn't afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you live after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Lived with her mother. In their home 'til I got work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long was that, do you remember how long you were out of work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well a couple of years or more you see on and off. Nothing settled. Y
es. I - when we had the first child I had typhoid fever. I was in the hospital for ten weeks. Mm. Ten weeks. Typhoid fever. I got it going to Southend for a holiday with the wife. She had one child at the time. Mm. Ten weeks I was away. Yes, went to South
end for a holiday - and the doctor at the hospital set on my seat. He said, if I had that I'd want to be drunk every day. See? 'Course you couldn't eat nothing much, typhoid fever. They say it gives you new inside.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You must have been very ill?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
 You catch it - I think it's eating a fish or something. Yes. Mm. I was at work at the time. See, and - ten weeks, when that was over I went back to work you see. Yes. A lot of people die with it. At that time it was luck - it was all over the place in th
em years. I'm talking about when I was about - about - I should say - when I was about - I was about - twenty-five. Between twenty-one and twenty - she had one child. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you move to after you stopped living with your mother-in-law, where did you go to after that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I lived in - Kings Cross Road. Yes. Kings Cross Road.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That was your first house after you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - two or three years then shifted somewhere else. When she was going to have a child see, I had to go right to Bartholomew}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
s Hospital, see. That was in the middle of the night, see. So I said, the time you get back the child be born. But of course - it was about two o'clock in the morning. Took me over a hour to get -
 back home you see, to walk it. Kings Cross to - the City. Yes, and the child was born. She was - pretty good - having her children. Mm. Oh and she kept 'em well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 After you moved to Kings Cross you say you moved again after a couple of years?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you move again after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes, two or three - then I was fifty years across the road here. In Wharfdale Road - In Caledonian Road. Viner Grove. Wharfdale Road. I was there fifty years. I moved there when I was about - between thirty a
nd forty, see, yes. And we had to shift out, they were going to make it into a - garage. And she passed away then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you lived there for most of your married life didn't you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Half of it. Half of it. Yes. Oh she was - she was - could do things bu
t - no scholar to read and write. Well she was the oldest child at Ely, where they come from. All come from Ely in Cambridge - to London, see, brothers and sisters. No work down there. At Ely. Cambridge, right out the way - district - that is. Mm. Was nic
e woman. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How old was she when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Seventeen. They got married when they were young them days you know, and had large families didn't they. Mm. Large families.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she work after she was married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. Not supposed t
o go to work when they get married. Still she had to go out to keep me. Well then I worked at a firm, another firm twenty-five years, and when I - when the war came you see - I - see what was I - I forget now what I was going to say. Something.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did your wife do, what job does she do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well she was - she worked at a factory, what they call a factory, I don't know what it was. Something to do with the army, the - making something or the other for the army, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she ever work again after that during her married life, did she have any other jobs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well she - had a weak heart for years, thirty years. See? But she's been to work to keep me. I know - I worked at a firm for about - couple of years - and when I give it up, they says you've
 got to pay so much - money what they call it, they stop you money, for the army wasn't it, they stopped so much money. Twelve and six a week they should have stopped. And they wait 'til I got out of work, they stopped me a hundred and thirty pound. And i
f
 I didn't pay it within twelve months I'd - I would have - lose the lot, they said, if you pay it within twelve months you can get half, see. So - I had a daughter, she had a fruit shop you see, she's a widow, she's alive now. Well I helped her enabled pa
y
 the money back you see. I said, as a rule, I says, you have to keep - pay to keep your wife. But my wife's paying to keep me. Paying then. Yes, so I got two years work there, paid the thirty pound - and got fifteen for it. Yes. Otherwise I should have lo
st the lot. But why didn't they stop it every week? See? Not wait 'til I was out of work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your wife ever work after she had children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't think so. No. Too many children to look after. Oh she couldn't do that. No, I was able to keep her at home with the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Once you were working again you could?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. See these were born every three years. 'Course she was full of - you know, looking after the children. Well she had plenty of work.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were first married and she went out to work how did she feel about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she like the job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
She seemed all right. She seemed all right then. Only too pleased to go to work. She helped to keep me once. I was out of work. Yes, I was out of work, we owed this h
ere - twelve and six a week, amounted to thirty pound. Why didn't they stop it when I was at the firm? Well upside down some of the thing the Government do.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many children did you have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Four. Two girls and two sons.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When were they born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you remember what dates they were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, not exactly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you and your wife still quite young when you had children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well there's two - two years and fifteen months - in between the first child.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You had the first child quite quickly after you were married did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you about twenty-two or something like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, had a child - she had a child every - just on two years, and fifteen months between each one. See? So the first one was
 born on - just on three years old, about twenty-three. So it went on, twenty-three, twenty-six, twenty-nine. And so on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were any of them born at home or were they all born in hospital?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 At home. Doctor. Had a doctor at home.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any nurses, did you have any nurses coming in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, they used to come in, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you help at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 While your wife was having the child you were able to help a bit?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to cook the dinner and all that. For Sunday. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How soon
 in those days did women stay in bed when they had a child? Did they get up quite quickly? Do you remember how you're your wife stayed in bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I couldn't say how long. Not like they do now. They almost went to work within a week. Mm. What do they care.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So most women would be out of bed almost immediately?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's right. Within a week - was up. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did any of your relations or neighbours come in and help you when your children were born?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - well you see I lived with her mother whe
n the first one was born. And you had the - landlady of the house where you lived, she'd - done her best. Yes, she done her bit. I was lucky to have one room, only one room. Then I got two rooms. Then took a house over there for fifty years, a house. Mm.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Did you have much to do with the children when they were little, did you ever help with the children at all when they were babies, when they were very small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh I - oh I done me bit. Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever feed or bath them when they were babies?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Never bathed 'em. My son - he - he lived at - Barnet, he had a bath put in his room, he had to pay four pound - extra - a year, having a bath made - into the home. None of 'em had bathrooms. Had to go to the baths up here. There was a bath up here.
 That's where I used to go, have me baths. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When your children were babies would you ever do things like changing their nappies and all that sort of thing, or would your wife do it?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was very clean. Very clean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Very clean she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you help with the babies like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Used to take the bag}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 -}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 wash to the laundry. Yes. She used to take it - so look here I says, I'm gong to take - so I got the bag and put it on me shoulders and took it to t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 he laundr
y. She didn't think I }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
ought to do anything, my wife. She said, don't go a certain turning, 'cos they'll see you. I said, look here, I don't care, I'm going to take it. And she used to carry it in the front like in a big bag. That's not nice. Is it. You car
ry a big bag of wash, when you come to bring it home or take - it's not very good. So I stopped that. I couldn't let her do it. She didn't want me to, she said, people look at you. I said, I don't care if they look at me.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Because the men didn't used to do very much.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I think the women used to everything. Ought to do everything them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever play with your children or put them to bed when they were very little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh we used - yes. Yes. Oh we had a good time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If they cried in the night when they were little would you get up to them, would you ever get up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well sometimes, yes, sometimes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you ever take them out for walks when they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Then when we had - the children I moved to Plaistow. See? I soon got back to London.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Didn't you like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. No shops or anything in Plaistow. They had the - East India Dock way. No, couldn't stick that. No shops there. So I moved back to - here. Mm. They used to go to school here. Children. Where I went. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Can you remember when you were married, in the first years of marriage, how much money did you give your wife, can you remember how much you'd give her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I only earnt twenty-five to thirty - shillings. I done all I could, she was satisfied.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You gave her quite a lot of that did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Mm. When you got married you were very - you could buy a room full of everything you wanted for five pound. Bed and - chairs, everything - for five pound. And a - and a bedroom - to pay about - I forget h
ow much I used to pay. I couldn't have paid much I know. Mm. Yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So how much did your wife have to live on, to manage, to do the housekeeping on?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - I give her as much as I could you see, I daresay I managed to give her the best part of it 
you see. Satisfied, oh I never kept her short. I had none myself I used to let her have her share. Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many rooms did you have in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where, over the road?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you living at Wharfdale Road before 1918? Were you living there during the war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I never had more than one room. Oh -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you living there before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh dear. Yes. I was living over here. Yes. I used to take - have to take me rifle home. I used to - four nights a week. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any other house that you lived in for quite a long time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The others you just moved around lots of times?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Never had another house.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many rooms did that house have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Six.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What were they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Two kitchens. Two parlours. Or two on the ground floor. Two up above. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any relations or lodgers living with you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. When the family got short and married - oh we let - some of the rooms. Oh yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever take in a lodger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh I took a lodger in. Had a couple of rooms.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't have anyone help in the house at all, you didn't pay anyone to help in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I could manage. I used to do all the steps and all that. If she was queer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You'd help out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And your washing would be taken to a laundry, you'd take it to a bag}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 -}{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 wash always?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They done all that. I used to see to that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about clothes, would your wife make the clothes, the children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{
\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she did used to make friends with - people in the houses next door and all that. Yes. They all went to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she make any clothes, would she make the children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she done all she could. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you buy clothes for the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh used to buy 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you buy them new or second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 hand?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
You could, yes. Oh you could buy 'em cheap. Well I bought - well see I've got a - overcoat in there and a - I've got - may have given four pound for it. Cheap enough then, they'd want about forty for it now nearly.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where would your wife buy your children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well plenty of shops about. Tailors and all that, plenty about. I used to get measured for me clothes, could afford it. Being at work. Mm.

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When would she buy new clothes for the children or for herself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well we never - never made much mess. They wore 'em a decent time. Patching and one thing and the other. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about shoes, would you buy new shoes or second}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 hand shoes for the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, the wife used to see to that. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Buy new shoes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
And would she buy those from a shop? You said you did used to help in the house sometimes, what would you do in the house, what - would you do any cleaning?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - to save her, sometimes she'd be laid up
. She had - pneumonia - I used to do the stairs, do the passage and - clean the kitchen out and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever do any cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The best of it was I used to sweep the chimney. The wife says, you can't sweep - why don't you get the man? I s
ays, if the man comes here and he shoves the brooms through - and down - I says, when I do it - I can make it last. And the kitchen don't get - full of smoke. When I do it, and I done the chimney. She says - I said, you sit there and you see me doing the 
c
himney. I had nine - nine rods. To go through right from the kitchen, see, right to the top, the chimney pot. Nine rods. But it's all right. I was a young fellow at the time. Mm. Oh we never had a smoky chimney after I done it. Mind you it used to choke y
ou, smoky kitchen. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever do any of the cooking?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Cooking? Oh when she had a child I had to do the cooking. I could cook the - cook - plaice. She said one days she says, I'll cook the eels. I says, you stop in bed. I says - I'll cook the 
eels. I cooked the eels, went and got 'em. Chapel Street, got the eels. Put 'em in a saucepan. 'Cos all you got to do is when they're boiling - take a bit out - and it's done. I done the - I done the cooking. Used to do plaice and all - fried for her. Oh 
y
es, I used to do the cooking. She was ill - she died in a hospital. Weak heart. She had a weak heart for about thirty years but she would walk. Sometimes she wanted to pass - something in her inside. Shed go down the stairs. I said, look here, why don't y
o
u stop indoors, if you do anything in there - I'll do it, see, I used to hide the torch - and hide the - key of the door. But she watched me and found out. She would go down, she was a very clean woman. When she was in the hospital about eleven weeks - sh
e says, I'm not - I'm the only woman - that's never wetted the bed. Very clean woman. Very clean. Very clean woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you help with the children at all? Would you help dress the children and undress them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You'd got to - got to do all that sort of thing, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you'd help bath them, would you read to them?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She used to bath them. In a - in the kitchen. In a big - bath thing. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever bath your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, she done that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you ever read stories to them? Or tell them stories?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to - well, they used to read theirselves you see, yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they were very little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They used to go to bed all right. No trouble.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you tell them stories when they were very small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Not much of that. No, they used to be all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You said you took them out for walks when they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes. Took 'em out for walks.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you look after them if your wife wasn't it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We went to Southend for a fortnight, we took the baby, sh
e had to carry all the time. See? Look here, I don't know whether you're married or not - but I said, look here - thirty-five years - you're going to have no more children. I said, you aint going to carry one about all your life. You know. Well to tell yo
u the truth, you see, to show that I kept m}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 e word, the youngest son of ours}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
 - was forty-two when he got married, see. So I kept to me word. See? I would - well my - my brother - he had a wife - fifteen children. I'd have got no - what life do they see? I - 
I think he ought to have been a man and - and made ends meet. Yes, he had fifteen. 'Course they never - used to - not worth much 'cos they used to die as quick. His wife never went out for a holiday at all. Well -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did some of those fifteen children die?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Not many lived, about two or three. Mm. Well no strength in 'em, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your children used to help in the house, did they have little jobs to do in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They wouldn't do a damn thing. They wouldn't even wash the stairs.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. I done it all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Why was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I done it all, when I had the time. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They didn't help your wife in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They wouldn't - they wouldn't help - well there's the one of 'em - married at forty-two, I too
k a shop you see. I sold it. He would - he wouldn't come and help. The one at forty-two got married. He wouldn't even come up to have me dinner at the shop. And he only had a little way to go. He didn't help me one thing. One that's forty-two. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they were little were they good in the house, did they help when they were very small? Would they help your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She done it all. She done it all. They didn't even wash a cup and saucer.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What time did you say your children had to go to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, they used to go to bed - she used to put 'em to bed early about - well, five or six perhaps at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would your wife put the children to bed, did your children share a bedroom? Or did they share a bed when they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, yo
u did have a bedroom I think. Mm. Yes, there was - a bedroom, yes. But of course - in them days you see there'd be a van come round - to see where the children were sleep. They don't care a hang now. A turning here - there's four people give a house up - 
there was eighteen black people went in there, after. Eighteen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who used to come round to look?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
One of the council men. See, they used to - and you had - couldn't sleep in the kitchen either. But now you can - sleep where you like now, long as you get the room.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They used to come round and see did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Yes, they come round and see, yes. Yes, see how you was living. They don't care a hang now you know. You can get on the best way you can.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So your children would sleep in one of the bedrooms and you and your wife would sleep in the other one?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she see they had - proper beds to lay on. Oh yes, separate, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you used to bath the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 In the kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How often would you do that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was very - every week. One or the other of 'em. Oh she was a very clean woman. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you know how often your children would have clean clothes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - daresay damn nigh every week she'd wash 'em. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you eat your meals when you were married, which room of the house did you use for eating in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We had the two kitchens. And the two top floors. And - we let - a double room I think it was. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Which room would you eat in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Eat in the kitchen. See, had a front and a back kitchen. 
Good front kitchen, good back kitchen. Mm. Them days they wouldn't let you sleep in a kitchen. Well I'm talking about they'd come round to look. And now you can sleep where you like.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever eat in any other room, you always ate in the kitchen did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was very good woman, she was clean. Nice in the kitchen. Everything was clean there. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did she cook?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 On a gas stove. We had a gas oven there in the kitchen you see. Mm. She used to sleep in one of the back kitchens. Childr
en up in the back - top room, and front room. Boys and the girls separate. She watched that. Mm. Separate, not mixed. Pretty good woman.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What time would you all have breakfast in those days you're your children were still young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - when she 
was at home of course she had to get 'em ready for school. But when I was at work I had to have me breakfast about half past seven. So as to get to work see them days. Got to be at work be eight o'clock. I worked right over at Dartford I did. I had to get
 there be half past seven. I used to catch it about - a train at Kings Cross - take me to Dartford. Because you couldn't get nothing in London - at the time. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 That's when work was short, you had to go right out to get a job?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How much was the fare then, how much would it cost you to get to Dartford?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Get a workman's fare. I forget now how much, not much. Shilling or - at the most.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you'd have breakfast early and your children would have breakfast later, you didn't all have breakfast together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She - see to them after got me to work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you used to have for breakfast in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - she done the best she could. You couldn't eat much 'cos you didn't have much time you see. Egg - egg or - somethi
ng like that. Not like when I was with my father at home. He would only get ha' - ha'penny eggs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Things got better didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - yes, ten times better.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you have time for a cup of tea before you went out?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Sometimes I didn't hav
e time, I had to get to work see. I used to go to a coffee stall and have a coffee. Oh she done her best. She had quite enough to get them children ready for school.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about on Sunday, would you have a special breakfast on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you have on Sunday?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh a nice bit of meat, cooked in the oven. I could afford it see. Mm. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have a special breakfast on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. Bacon - bit of bacon fried or egg fried. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't go home for lunch then when you were at work, where would you have lunch?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I used to be - I did go home once. But it was too much so I stopped - in the City I worked. And I worked in a turning when I got married - in Chapel Street, you see, before I went here - at - I used to do the best. Get though it somehow. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would your wife give the children for midday meals, what would they have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she - she looked after them well you know, what was best for 'em. Oh she was best, mm. Oh she done good
 for 'em, what - children. Proper - wife fore - children. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to eat a meal when you came home in the evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I couldn't eat no breakfast much. I used to have a lunch at the firm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you eat again when you came home at night? Would your wife prepare a meal for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well we had fish easy, yes, fried fish. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about on Sunday, did you have anything special to eat on Sunday evening?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, had a joint.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Sunday tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Joint. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever have a cake for Sunday tea, would you have cakes and things on Sundays for tea?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, we'd have what we wanted. Cakes or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You could afford that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. They were cheap.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your wife ever make here bread, did she make bread?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Or jam?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Pickles?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cheap - too cheap. Didn't want to make it. Too cheap.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she ever bottle any fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm? No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she ever make any medicines?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. They usen't to want that. She used to - get - things from the doctor if they wanted it. Oh she'd see to all that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did she ever}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
make wine or beer?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. Well we used to get it so cheap you see. See - the - pint bottle of beer there for about - tuppence ha'penny or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 
\af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 pence. Wasn't worth - making.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have a garden?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, in the front of the house. She used to be a rare one for flowers. Yes. 'Course when she got queer I had take that on. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever grow any vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Tried to. No good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The soil wasn't very good, was that why?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Potatoes only come out as big as marbles. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you used to buy all your fruit and vegetables did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to go up Chapel Street. I'd get - about five pound of potatoes, some cabbage. Get five pound of 
potatoes for sixpence then. You could. Up Chapel Street here. Five}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826  pound for sixpence. And - Bruss}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 el}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid15993820\charrsid3281826 s}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  sprouts about - sixpence a - pound. Mm. Very cheap. You could live on it you see.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever have tinned fruit or vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Or what? What do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were married would your wife ever buy tinned fruit or tinned vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh, we used to buy - apples or anything of that you see, at fruit - fruit shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She didn't buy fruit in tins?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Or dried fruit?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She used to make Christmas pudding and all. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So she bought dried fruit like raisins and currants and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But not any dried vegetables?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you keep any livestock at that time, any hens or rabbits?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We had - chickens. On a Sunday had a chicken. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have chickens when the children were little, did you keep any?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, I think the boy when he grew up. He had the chickens, yes. And of course they used to see 'em. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many times a week do you think you'd eat meat you're your children were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I don't know what you mean.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many times a week would your family eat meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She fed 'em well.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you think they'd eat meat nearly every day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They had plenty of what they wanted. Oh she see to that. Oh she give 'em all they wanted.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you ever remember her buying any tinned meat?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She wouldn't buy it, she'd buy it already fresh. Mm. And she -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your wife ever have to go short so that you and the children could have more?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. Well see I used to get - so much a week from the union. I managed all right. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you get larger helpings, would you be given more than the others?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. I told the wife, I said, you don't have the same as me 
I shan't have none. She used to - you know - think too much of me. As regards food and what I wanted. She used to patch her clothes to save money. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about your children}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s table manners, were they allowed to talk at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh she see to all that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could they choose what they wanted to eat or did they have to have a bit of everything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she said - they got what they wanted. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you allow them to leave food on the plate?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Always kept 'em - in a proper position. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about things like salt, did they have to ask for salt to be passed to them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, if they wanted it they'd have it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could they have second helpings?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If they wanted it. They had it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they have to hold their knives and forks in a certain way?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well if they couldn't do it the wife'd do it for 'em. Cut it up. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And they had to sit up properly at the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Could they bring books or toys to the table?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well you couldn't get many toys them days, see.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you let them take them to the table with them when they were having a meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When could the family leave the table?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Children, I believe they was told 'til we all finished.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You'd all sit down at the table together would you, you and the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have regular places, would you always sit in - the same place?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who would serve the meal?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The wife.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What order would she serve you in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. In the kitchen. Nice clean kitchen. Big kitchen.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would she serve you first or would she serve the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, used to - all together. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When the children were little did they sit in a high chair?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And she'd feed them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And be careful - case the chair went over. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When your children were little did you think there was a right way of bringing them up?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The wife did. The wife see to that. Very good. How to bring children up she was.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 Did you both a}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 gree on the same way of bringing children up?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I let her have her way like that way. Mm. Mm. Yes, she was a very clean woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If you were worried about the children was there anyone you used to talk to about it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She'd be - she'd get over it. She had - she had a
 child in bed when she had pneumonia, couldn't get away. I had one with the scarlet fever, couldn't get it in a hospital. Had to have 'em here at home. Them days - they're past.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your mother-in-law used to help you with the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I used to go there every week with her mother and have tea po - supper.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She used to give your wife advice about bringing up the children did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you think your mother-in-law and your wife had the same ideas about bringing up children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was a very nice woman. She brought a family up. Her mother. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And so she'd often see her grandchildren would she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. They separated all over London. Families. Get where they could.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Can you tell me some of the things you fel
t you ought to do for your children? Were you affectionate towards them? Did you find it easy to be affectionate to your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She used to tidy 'em just as they ought to be tidied. The wife. How they wanted this and that because they got it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you affectionate to your children, you loved them did you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I used to love 'em - I used to love and never touched 'em. 'Til one day she said, you never let the children do what they like. Well they - they'd got to do what they like hadn't they. Mm. I couldn't hit one.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were your children able to come and talk to you if they were worried about things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They was all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they come to you and tell you about it?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, they went to - their mother took all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And she'd see about food and safety and everything? How did you want your children to behave towards you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well they - she see they behaved properly. Yes. They did. Oh they all liked their mother.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you ever able to go out and leave the children when you were - when they were young?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We never left 'em when they was young, always somebody with 'em. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to go out at all, you and your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, she used to say, you can go out, I'll stop and look after the children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't go out together?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Never went out, no. She wanted - she was at home and stopped there my wife. 'Til we went without the children to Southend. But when we got the family she stopped at home all the time, to look after 'em. Couldn't go out and take - well
 she has took a baby to Southend. But I wouldn't let her do it. I wouldn't go. Carry a baby all day. No joke, no joke.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about in the evening, would you and your wife be able to go out and leave someone looking after the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We thought t
oo much of stopping at home. Reading the paper or - listening to the wireless. Now one of my son's won a wireless - made a wireless, we listened to that. She used to like stopping in like that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If grown ups were talking did you let your children join in the conversation?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She wouldn't let 'em. They kept their place. Mm. They kept their place all right.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you bring them up to consider important in life, what did you think was important for your children to know?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - they used to get a job theirselves - and do the best we could with 'em to help 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If another child hit them what would you tell them to do?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She used to say, go and hit 'em back.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there any children you would discourage your children from playing with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I couldn't help it. They played - played enough in the school I think.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you let them play with any children in the street?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, well you couldn't help it. They wanted their fun the same as you. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there any children your wife didn't like them playing with?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, she was very good. She done her best.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 If your children did something you didn't like how would you punish them, you said you'd never hit them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They was all pretty good though. Mm. Pretty good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't have to punish your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. She wouldn't let 'em swear or anything. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would your wife ever hit the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well she - she used to - had to give 'em a smack. She says to me, you never touch 'em. Well I couldn't.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you think your children received the ideas about how to behave from you or from your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I believe so. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 From your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. They kept their place. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You think your wife had a great influence on your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was with them all the time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. Yes, she'd get 'em to bed early. Four or five and then we used to have a nice - talk and read the paper in the kitchen. And - listen to the wireless.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would happen when your children had a birthday, would they have presents, would you give your children presents?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, would do. Yes, if we could afford it. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they have a birthday cake or anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. If we could afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you know if they had any friends, would any friends come in to tea with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Christmas, how did you and your wife spend Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Used to go to her mother. Stop up all night - in the kitchen. Mm. Christmas time. Yes. She was living in the same turning whe
re I lived. Wharfdale Road. Her mother. In fact her brother and all lived - mm. Lived in the same turning. So was right next door to one another.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you and your family would go there for Christmas would you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you have for Christmas?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - they see that we had something, a turkey or - chicken or something of that. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Christmas puddings and things?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you buy Christmas presents for the children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Oh yes. Oh she knew how to handle things. Feeding them and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any musical instruments in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What? Only the wireless my son made.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't play anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, there was a wireless.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your children play any instruments?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Not like your father who played the violin?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did any of you sing in your family, did the children sing, did you ever sing together in a group?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well it was always separate you see and they got - when you come to put it three years different - see
 he went right above him see. So they couldn't mix all together you see. See? They was too tall. One with the other.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever play any games with your children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, I played on the floor with 'em. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would your wife play with them, would she join in any games with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of games do you think she'd play with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh, anything there was, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any books in your house, you and your wife, did you read at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh - my son used to read books
. She couldn't read much. She couldn't write much. I used to have my share of the newspaper every night. See? I used to read that. Tell her what was in it see. No scholar, it's not her fault. Her mother couldn't - couldn't get her to school. So she come t
o London with her. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any magazines in your house or did the children have any comics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to have comics. Cheap, they're a ha'penny and a penny. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you or your wife belong to a library or children?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh some did. Yes
. Yes, a pile of books as high as that. I took them to the hospital. Oh one used to - read here - 'til twelve o'clock at night. The youngest one. Forty-two for he - never left only we told him - we was getting old, he's got to look for a partner. Found a 
partner then he couldn't find a - room, so he had to go right out Dorking way. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 He used to read quite a lot when he was a boy?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Whole pile of books. Twelve o'clock at night.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever read to your children or would they read to each other?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well they was scholar enough you know to read theirselves what they wanted. They was always playing. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your wife ever take your children out to visit people?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Always - I've known her to come - if - if I was at home she used to 
go every week to her mother. I've known her to have a - a child in each arm, coming home. Not far to go but she - quite far enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would she ever go out visiting any neighbours with the children or would she visit any friends? Would she take the chil
dren to visit friends?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well we used to have our fun with our children at home you see. No need to take 'em out or anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you take your children out alone, would you ever go out with them by themselves on a Sunday or Saturday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, I've took 'em out - for a walk.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you go?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But the worst of it is they want carrying.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they were older?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to take 'em to the station, see the trains. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What station was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Kinds Cross. I've been all round this neighbourhood.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you used to do on Bank Holidays, your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Hampstead. Used to go to Hampstead.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What was there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cor - one of the finest places out, Hampstead. Ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t you heard of it, Hampstead? Cor, it's one of the finest \{BLANK\} Showrooms and all that there. For about tuppence or three}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826  }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 pence you could get the children and take 'em up there we used to. Hampstead. Holiday time. Always. Oh yes.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What would you do when you were there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well we used to sit about and -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 On the Health?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. See the fairs.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They had a big fair there did they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Always they had fairs. Stalls and all.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you used to go there on Bank Holidays?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm. Very good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go for another holiday, you said 
you went to Southend when you had one baby, did you ever take your children away for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Yes, she used to take 'em out. Yes, take 'em to Southend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 For the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Yes. Southend. Soon as they were able to walk. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go with them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, me and the wife. Take 'em. Take the youngsters.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you used to stay there or did you just go for the day?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh only for a day sometimes. But I've spent a fortnight there. A week I've spent there with the children. What w
e had - children. Perhaps - couple of children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Why did you go to Southend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cheapest. Go to Southend for about - couple of bob I think or - or a shilling. Very cheap, Southend.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And you'd all go together would you, what would you do there for the day?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well could only sit on the sands with the children. Couldn't walk far - with the children. Used to go and take their boots and socks off, paddle in the water see. While we sat in a deck chair on the - on the - sand. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was it crowded at that time?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cor - packed. Mm. Yes, absolutely packed Southend them days. I don't know what it's like now.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have Saturdays off then or did you work on Saturday when the children were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I have worked on Saturday. Yes. To get me money. Glad to - glad to get anything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Were you working on Saturdays in about 1900, when your children were about ten, would you be working on a Saturday or would you have Saturday off?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Always at work Saturdays. Helping father. Mm. In the shop.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And when you started as a machine ruler did you work on Saturday mornings always?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. I think we had Saturdays off.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So what did you do with Saturday, what would you and your wife and the children do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - always something to do
 at home. Perhaps do this and do that. She used to have the flowers put in and all that she did. Always - every week she'd go and do - flowers from Chapel Street, stick in the garden in the front. Always. She liked flowers. And of course she had to give i
t up. Thirty years she had a weak heart. Told not to go upstairs but she would. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Sunday, what would you do on Sunday? Did your children go to Sunday school?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. They used to - one time.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they were little?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you and your wife ever go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And the children only went to Sunday school while they were small?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 There's one at the top of the turning.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you and the children wear different clothes on Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Much as they could - could afford. Yes, much as you could afford.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you think it was wrong to enjoy yourself on a Sunday in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 A lot of people did think that at that time didn't they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Them days.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you and your wife belong to a savings club?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Savings club, yes. That's for clothes that was. She did - paid for 'em. Yes. For some clothes. Mm. So much a week - paid for it. Well we had to. Couldn't put the money down for it. So we paid so much a week.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Was that through a shop?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. No, I don't know if its from a shop, but there was a man that used to call.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you take part in any sports at that time? Did you ever play any sports, when you were a married man?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes, I played - when I went to - oh - I think I do once or twice but - not much. Always had to be at home with the children to help the wife. Mm. On Saturday.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you do once or twice, what sort of sport did you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Football. Football it was, mm. Football.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where would you play football?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I think we went to a - a - I forget now where it was. I forget now, somewhere about. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever do any fishing or go out for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Yes, used to go out - she used to tell me
, go on, you go out for a walk, go on. Well I had to please her. While she had a sleep. I was ninety-one before I went in the home. Gerald}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 s homes, these homes. Ninety-one. Some of them have been in there at sixty-five. More cheek}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826  than me. I'm nobody. The new o}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 n}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 e}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
s come in, well I see one sitting in the chair all day, belongs to me. She knew I used to sit there. All the day the girl - the one who sits next to me says, yes, she's been there all - then they used to say, oh the old man's coming down, so I sort 
of said, I'll give you old man. No, treat you like dirt.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you and your wife and your children ever go out for walks?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Cor - no. Well we used to take 'em - we went to Southend once. Now what's the good of gong to Southend for a holiday - if sh
e's carrying her baby about all day. Ay? No good at all. So I packed that up.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you had the one child you said you went to Southend for a holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Southend we used to go.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who did you stay with, did you stay with a landlady at Southend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you stay when you went to Southend?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Oh yes, yes. Oh yes, we had a room where we sat in you know. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But you thought with your wife having to carry the child about it wasn't really a proper holiday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your wife have a pram or did she used to carry the child?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes, sometimes, you pay so much for it, the used of it. Never had one at home. Had to borrow one from the shop you see. Had to pay for it. Yes, I wish I'd have gone with 'em. Had enough of this. Yes. Enough of this.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you interested in racing at that time?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to do racing - day after day. 'Til he stopped tuppence out of the five and six I wouldn't do no more and I'm better off for it.
 Finished with it a couple of years ago. Well of course being a barbers shop you talk sports and all that see. I finished with that game. Mm. Yes, I said, what have you stopped me tuppence for? Oh that's the rates. All right, I thought, so you can keep th
em, I'm not - not doing no more. I wouldn't do no more.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Did you have any hobbies? Things you were interested in when you were a young man and when you had your children at home, did you have any hobbies that you were interested in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to go to
 the dog racing and - Harringay. Mm. She used to say, go on, you go, I'll stop - here. She wouldn't go out much. She couldn't. Her heart wouldn't let her.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you do any gardening at all? Or did your wife do most of it?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She was a very good wife f
or a garden. So when she was too queer you see I see to it. I done it. I grew a tobacco plant. It's got a scent to it. Mm. Next door says you'll get some nice scent from your tobacco plant, it was in the front see. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any other interests
 outside the home besides going off to the dog racing and things, did you do anything else outside your home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. I used to go on the committee of the - at the - union I belonged to. I went on the committee but I - I wouldn't take no pay. No. They cou
ldn't get nobody to do it see, all at - soldiering or something. Mm. I joined 'em when I was forty-five. And the men wasn't called up. I done four draws a week. Went to work took me rifle with me and went to work. With me rifle, took me rifle 'cos I could
n
't go home, I had to get - get there be - Exeter Street be - soon after six. I asked the firm to let me off a minute so six, they wouldn't do it. 'Cos I could catch a tram - a minute to six, take me right up there. So I had to get there somehow. Oh you ha
d
 to be on parade as though you was a proper soldier. Had to there a certain time. In fact the man said, I shall make you men drill - that you'll be so tired - that you won't be able to take your clothes off, that's nice aint it, ay? Man going to work and 
t
alking like that, letting them drill you four nights a week. Oh there's some pigs about. He took - he didn't go to work. He was - treating all the - regiments and all that see. Yes, you wouldn't catch me joining - again if I had my time over again. They c
ould keep it. Oh they've got a - they've got a decent life of it now aint they, soldiers? Their wife go to where they - drill. Or where posted. No, I don't want none of that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were a member of your union committee did you ever have to go to mee
tings in the evening? When you were a member of your union committee did you ever have to go to meetings in the evenings?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I've done it many -
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 After work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. I had me rifle at work. And I was doing the job.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about the union meetings, were they after work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were on the committee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What did you used to do on the committee?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to - take charge of all the cases they brought and in front of 'em. Mm. Any man done anything wrong or someth
ing, anything of that. I used to do that for him. For them. They couldn't get nobody else to do it, I says, I'll do it free.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of cases did they have?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm? What do you mean?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of cases were brought before the union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Perha
ps they'd done wrong, couldn't get the rent, couldn't get the - pay from the union. Wasn't in it long enough, and perhaps they never paid their contributions. And all that see. Yes, you had to scratch 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they bring cases against their employers at all?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No, not much. Couldn't do it. He wouldn't take no notice, he'd give you the sack. He would, if you done that. Oh you had to put up with a lot.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did anyone outside the home ever help you or your wife to look after the house? Your wife looked after the house alone did she?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 We had a lodger. Up top. Mm. Had a lodger up the top. Yes, a lodger up the top.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go on seeing your relations or your in-laws who lived near you? Did you go on seeing your mother-in-law who lived near you, 
would you spend some time with her?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I used to go there every week very nearly, to see her mother-in-law. Well, she was a good woman behind us. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have any other family living near you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Members of your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Not many. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 So you didn't see much of the rest of your family?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well - too - not time. Time was all took up with our own children. See to help them to play.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about friends, did you make any friends at work, did you have friends whom you brought home from work?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well, went to job one day - odd man - so a man says, we'll soon get the sack now. I said, look here - I'm the last in, I'm going to be the first out. And when - I told the - the foreman, I said, I'm going to give it up. He said, why? I
 said them men says when I went there - they'd be going out and I'd be keeping on, so I'm going out first - I said, I'm going. I'm the last in and I'll be the first out. That cured that. So I looked for another job. No, they think you went their to take t
h
eir job away. Here - what I'd like to tell you and your doctor. Has he got any men - patients got the hernia? If he's got any patients for hernia for Gawd's sake - tell him to get them in the hospital. Because they don't want eight years like I've had. 'C
o
s the doctor never told me to go to the hospital, or got me there. His place to have got me there. Not let me have it for eight years. In fact he didn't know what belt to put on. I said, what's the best belt? He said, elastic one. You want a belt that did
n
't give. But of course I had to keep them on there, in that - belt had stretched it'd - come off. But that was a fixture. Kept it on in - in bed I did see, the belt. Wear it all day and night, in fact I've been to work with it. Two years I was down in tha
t
 hospital with it. Mm. Used to - didn't want it first. But - I don't know if your doctor's got any cases, but he should get 'em to the hospital, if your heart's all right they'll do it. Mm. It's a misery to have it. Because it's going like that see. To st
rangle you. It moves. You know to get together. They can save mine in time. Shocking thing a hernia.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have many friends at that time, you and your wife, did you have many friends who would come in to see you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well, the family used to come to see us. The grown ups. We was all right on our own. We was, yes, all right on our own.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever invite any friends into your home? You and your wife when you were younger?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes, used to have some - well the family. Family used to come with their wife. See?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when your children were younger? Did you ever have friends who came into your home to see you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Mm. Oh yes. My brothers - used to come with their wives. Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would you offer them things to eat and drink when they came?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes, tea and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When would they come, on any special days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Saturday. Weekend. Weekend they used to come, they used to be at work you see. Yes, they used to be at work.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about friends, would they call into your house to see your wife without an invitation do you think, would people just call in?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They'd ask me how she was getting on. Mm. Ten to twelve. Being like I am. No, they're jealous round here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 They're not as well you you see are they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 A lot of them can't walk properly can they?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Mm. They won't look after theirselves. All in the legs. They do nothing to their legs, I do. Tell you you've got to walk about to keep on. That's their doing. They think }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 t}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 hey're going to get better sit
ting on their backside all day and not go out, and not do anything, well then as I tell 'em - so they can get on with it. I shouldn't be like I am now if I didn't care of meself. I've have me operation I'll admit. That's what started it. Eight years I had
 a steel belt. Then they operated. Put it all away and it don't come back. No. This side and that side. Mm.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You don't have rheumatism do you, you don't have any rheumatism or anything?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I've had a day in bed this week. I had the }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 diarrhoea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 , and it was the middle of the night, I knew there was nobody down there. They could - when - somebody come in I says, you've got some medicine down there - that's stops a person's - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 diarrhoea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 , will you get it - get it. Stopped it directly. You know that? Been in t
he daytime - well I says to 'em about it and - the Matron, I said, I've got the - }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 diarrhoea}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
. Oh go and see the doctor. Well I think you've got some medicine in there without going to see him. She wouldn't give it to me. That Matron - hub. I'm fed up with 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
After you were married you said you lived with your mother-in-law for a while, and then you moved to Kings Cross, where did you go after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Kings Cross.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where did you move after that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I lived in Farringdon Road. I lived with the 
wife's mother. And I was fifty years over there. In there - Viner Grove, Wharfdale Road. Fifty years, the wife died there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you moved to Plaistow?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You said you moved to Plaistow for a while, how long did you stay there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh - yes. Well I was there about - well about - three or four years. But of course it's no good to me - couldn't see no life at Plaistow, so I come back to Kings Cross and the children. And went to her mother's 'til I found a place, in Kings Cross Ro
ad, from there I went over here.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were these houses you were living in or were you living in rooms or a flat? Were you living in a whole house in Kings Cross Road or a flat?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 In a flat.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many rooms did you have there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I had two you see. Mm. Kings Cross Road.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 But this house in Wharfdale Road you had the six rooms?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you light fires for your wife when you were married?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did I what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you light the fire for your wife?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 She done a bit - if she was - could stand up. I used to do the rest.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you were just married, when your children were young, would you light the fire at all at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do anything. Mm. She'd do anything. Oh she was a good woman.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about repairs in the house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Chairs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Repairs and decorating, would you ever do anything like that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I don't know, I think I have done it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When you were younger did you do painting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I think I done a bit of it. Mm. I done all I could, cleaned the steps and stairs and all that. Anything she wanted doing - I'd do.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you have a landlord in those days who did repairs for you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. Fair landlord. They put the rent up. When I was at - out of work I got National Assistance. They paid the rent. Whe
n I was out of work. I don't know. I've had - I've had - money from the - from the Government like. Bloke said, here, give us that. Twelve and six and I had four children to keep. One at work. Twelve}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826  and six they give me. And snat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 ched out of me hand. But i
t's different now. I used to sign on over the water when I was out of work you see. A man says - at the - on the - banks - coo - see that man, you can't get a - a job like them men are getting. Get a job like them men? They're just waiting - I said, look 
at the queue. I said, you're talking a lot of tommy rot. Give somebody else a do. Do I had to wait till I got a job. Then I got the - pay you know from the Government, what they used to allow you know.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How much was that?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I don't think it was much more than ten bob I don't think. Not much I know. I've had about twelve bob from the union.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Whenever you were out of work you could always get some money from the union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 The Machine Rulers Union?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about Sundays, when you were married and you had your children how did you spend Sunday?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I what? Oh doing about the garden or - bit of the house and all that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go to church?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I go out one night - and I was treading on beetles in the kitchen. All 
in a line, about two o'clock in the morning. I thought I'd go in the kitchen and see everything's all right, there was black beetles all over the place. And the people next door to that was over here. I got rid of 'em. The people there used to sit on the 
table there, they were frightened to touch 'em. I got rid of 'em. Black beetles. They come from the fireplace.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you get rid of them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Fireplace they come from. I soon shifted 'em. Oh - used to be so long at the kitchen so I was treading on '
em. And - there was a kind of a fellow that got rid of 'em see. Well I used that powder and put it on - and they used to carry it in their ba}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 c}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 ks to the hole. Never done away with 'em. No. The people in the houses got 'em, why other people have 'em in is be
cause they won't get rid of 'em. I did. Everywhere. Yes, they sit on their backside down there. All they do is to open the door in the summer and just sit outside. And they walk here anyhow. I've got no sympathy for 'em, if you tell 'em what's good for it
 - they don't use it. No, the people down there are jealous of me 'cos I get about at my age. I know. I mean I'm - what - I'm not - not daft.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you and your wife ever go to church in those days?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No, we couldn't, we had - too much worry at home s
ee. Go to church. I had a - a - one of the church wardens come and see me every week, he did, for a rest, he comes here now. Yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your children go to Sunday school, did you send your children to Sunday school.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well the wife looked after that. Mm. Well they had to go to school - Sundays. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they go to a Church of England school or was it a chapel?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 It was a little church - top of - the top of the Grove where I - lived. Used to be a little church up there. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And the children used to go to Sunday school there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. That woman you was talking to, she sits on her backside there all day 'til eight o'clock tonight. From eight o'clock in the morning. Watching everything what's going on in the room. She is. And if they're talk
ing too much she tells 'em to shut up. Ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
t been here five minutes. When she first come here she sat in my seat all day. Mm. Oh she's got plenty of it don't forget.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ask her to move?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You got - what's the good of you coming into a place an
d going to be cock of the walk, ay? Can't you keep your - your mouth shut. Not - talk about other people to shut up and all that. I don't - speak and I ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t going to. She was looking at me all day. Just like that. And never shifts it. Only going to the - toilet. - Oh dear. I've had to turn me head the other way. So as I - starting at me.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you say grace at meals when your children were small in your house?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do what? Any what? Grapes?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Would they thank God for food?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh no. No. No. No we didn't have that. Very good children. Very good children.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did they say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Pretty good. Mm. Pretty good.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Who taught your children to say prayers at night?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I mean I take care.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did your children say prayers?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh little -
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When they went to bed?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Oh yes. Oh yes. They used to say their prayers. I had a son used to say - take - say his prayers. I say my prayers of the night here. Every night. I do. In bed. They don't I'll bet, down there.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about politics when you were a young mand and had a family, were you interested in politics?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I used to - vote Labour. Vote Labour, mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you were a young man, before the Labour party, who did you vote for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I - I used to vote for 
Labour. I know one night, I had a - a house over there - and the landlord says, go up the Town Hall and get the ten bob off - what they're going to put on. I went in - so the man says - but you don't pay rent, see? There's thirteen men there, I says, don'
t pay rent. If I don't pay it direct I pay it indirect in the rent. Oh do you, well it's only so and so much a week. I says, that's good enough. He says, wait outside. He said, we're still going to put the ten bob on.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What? When I w
as a - when I was out of work, about middle age - about middle age I was. Of course the rent's supposed to go down, if the house, you know, is not as it should be. Instead of that they put ten bob on. And whatever I do - sweep the chimney and all I did. I
 
had no - well if you went to get a - a sweep he'd charge you sixpence or more. He only just put a broom through and we always used to have the smokes. So I says to the wife, she says, you don't want to do - I said, you can sit there and see me do it. I pu
t
 nine - nine sticks right through the house you see. And never had a smoky chimney after. Because soon as it smoked, up went the broom. I paid two pound for it. Mm. You couldn't trust a man sweep - he used to make a mess on the - kitchen floor you see, ge
t a cup of tea. I stopped that. I done it meself. I cleared me own mess up. They used to come in and they used to smack all the bundle of - on the floors, stuff all about the place. I stopped all that. Mm. Of course I was able to do it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about politics round about 1900, when you were about thirty who would you vote for then?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
I was in the union, I worked at a firm for twenty-five years. Educational Supply. They do all the work for the schools, I got a job there. Until I - 'til the war. Then of course - I - lost the job through that.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What party would you vote for before the first world war?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Labour. Always Labour.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 And before the Labour party came in who would you have voted for?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Well I wouldn't vote at all. No. Well they told m
e I didn't pay no rent, there's thirteen men there with a Chairman, turning round and saying I don't pay no rent. No rates. Why I says, I pay it in me rent. So after that I wouldn't vote - for nobody. Committee of thirteen men with a Chairman - no, don't 
pay rent. You know, I paid double it in me - rent. They put it on quick enough.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You remember voting in some general elections though do you?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Before 1919 you did vote?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm. I didn't vote after that. Soon as they put the ten sh
illings on. I wouldn't vote - after. I had thirteen men tell me that I don't pay it. Extra to rent. Direct - indirect, and I pay it indirect, and that's enough for me. You don't know your job, if you do you ain}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 \rquote }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 t telling me you think I'm a fool. So I stopped that.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Why did you used to vote for the Labour party when you were voting?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well you don't get nothing off the Tories. They don't suit me. Working men - working - Government, Labour Government for Labour people. Well they put ten shillings on me
 - on the pension, Labour did, when they got in. In fact, when I was getting ten bob a week, they says the - the country's in a poor state, they thought about taking a shilling off the ten shillings they give me. Yes. That's who - who's the chap - I forge
t his name now. He was a elderly man. He passed away, I should think so too. Tell you talk about taking a shilling of an old man's pension of ten bob. Lloyd George. He brought that in.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever vote for Lloyd George in the early part of the century, would you have vote for the Liberals and L}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 l}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 oyd George?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Always. Always had him for it - for the - Labour. He was a Labour - Mp, if he didn't get in I voted for him. Mm. I couldn't stand the others.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about your wife, did she used to vote after 1918?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
'Cos she's no scholar. She was no scholar. I didn't want her to worry over it. So I done it all meself. She had enough to do with the children.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever feel that anybody put any pressure on you to vote for anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. They used to. Yes. Well I can say yes and that - and - put me - when I voted I - pleased meself what I put down.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did anyone ever ask you to vote for anybody?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Oh yes. I've had bills and that - to stick in the window. O wouldn't have 'em. The Tories. '
Course they was in about sixteen years. I wouldn't have none of their papers stuck in the window. No. Oh I've been through it. I've had - Government Relief, National Assistance, I did. I got relief from the parish. Twelve and six, only had one at work, pa
id the rent and everything.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You got help from the parish, when did you get that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Well I think I was about - I had one at work. It was - I daresay I was a man of about - well - not quite thirty. Mm. Yes. I had to rely on the chapel - for me rent - 
for me money - to pay the rent. The wife asked 'em to give me extra money to pay for the rent. My son says, I'll give dad sixpence a week, he's out of work, can't afford to pay no more for the rent. So the - wife, she's going to smack in the face and I go
t
 in between 'em, oh he was a nasty one, the boy. One of my sons - he give me a hundred pounds to mind for him, two years ago. I said - I says, what are you going to do? You going to have it. This older one wouldn't give me that much. The youngest one. Not
 
that. He wanted a pocketful of money. Mm. When I was sixty-two I opened a shop. I couldn't get no work. In the '14 war. I had a shop. I sold it. Mm. I couldn't get rid of it 'cos the landlord wouldn't let anybody come in to buy it. In the finish I put it 
in a agents hands and sold it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What sort of shop was that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Confectioners. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you enjoy doing that?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I - I took it on, the wife was ill. I said look, go to the union and - to get a job, and worked the shop and all on me own. I should 
have gone my - thank Gawd I only had that - operation - when I was - at the home. I had to put up with it before - well the wife was always ill, I couldn't go to - the hospital if she was in bed, 'til she got a - call from the hospital. See? Well it's a w
onder I am - as I am I tell you.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were you ever a member of a political party?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Yes. I was a member. 1901. When I was out of work to pay me twelve shillings a week. Since I've been in the home they've took the pension away. The men won't pay a penn
y or tuppence extra. So I've been without it - they made it eight bob a week, I've been without that this last - sixty - sixty-five I think it was. Mm. 1865. Or 1965.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about a political party, were you ever a member of the Labour party, did you ever join the Labour party?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Never joined them.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever help them at elections, did you ever do any work for them?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. Had no time for 'em.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't take part in any political activities?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How did you spend your time, you and your wife, when you weren't at work, what would you do?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Couldn't afford to go far - had the rent to pay. Couldn't afford to go anywhere much, 'til I was - she passed away.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about when you had your children, or when the children were grown up, a bit older, would you go out in the evenings with your wife?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Used to go out Saturday nights to a music hall perhaps. Mm. Then just afford it then.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you go to one of the music halls somewhere round here?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Drury Lane. Drury Lane. The Middlesex. In Drury Lane, Leather Lane.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Were there some good performances there?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many evenings would you spend at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many do what?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 How many evenings did you spend at home with your wife?
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 I was always at home with the wife when I had nothing to do. I looked after her. Yes, she had a weak heart.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 When your children were growing up did you spend most of your evenings at home?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Yes. Mm.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 You didn't go out much by yourself?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No, she said, why don't you go out? I wouldn't go out. No. She had to keep in. Yes, she couldn't go far with a weak heart.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you ever go out to a club or a pub?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No. I used to get a drop of beer for - to have a drink. Indoors. Never went in pubs. No. Couldn't afford it.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Did you belong to any savings clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Any what? No-
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Boot clubs or sick clubs?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. No.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 What about insurance?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No. I insured my wife and meself. Oh yes. And she - she looked after that. She insured me two or three ti
mes. Mm. She knew she was gong before me. Very good woman, very. Well I says to my doctor when I reached ninety - put me to sleep, I want to go with my wife where she's going. He says, I can't do that. See, I went in the home at ninety-one. As I reached n
i
nety if she does. Or if she goes I'll go with you if I reach ninety. I've had enough, I've had enough of this. Enough of this. Yes, I would - I wouldn't go - I wouldn't mind if I went tomorrow. No. I'm afraid of my daughter what I got - she come to see me
. I'm afraid she won't last long, she's got a weak heart her daughter told me. The daughter I've got, the granddaughter told me her mother's got a weak heart. Well I says - I've had two - next of }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 
\insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 kin}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  die you know. I have. Me living so long. So - I says, wel
l supposing you goes, the third one. Fourth - I've - asked - I lost two and I lost one, he wouldn't do it, he says, I - my wife aint' going to have the worry of that. No children they didn't have. And he was only forty-two when he got married, so I says -
 
so I've got the fourth next of kin now. I said, supposing you pass away? Your granddaughter'll take it on. The union I belong to's going to allow me so much when I pass - my daughter, if she - took care of me like, when I pass away. They says, he's got so
me money to come. Well send it down to you at Hastings, if you send us a copy - of his death certificate. 'Cos they keep that you see, and they photo one for you to keep for yourself. Mm. A copy. Oh they give you the - the proper copy.
\par 
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Many people div
ide society into different social classes or groups. In that time before 1918 did you think of some people belonging to one and some to another? Could you tell me what the different ones were?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Mr Mennie said that he wasn't really aware of a middle or 
upper class in his everyday life. Most upper classes lived in the outskirts of London, or in the country. He only ever came into contact with them when he went to the music hall with his wife. He didn't that there was any recognizable middle class in the 
London before the war. Most people were poor, and labelled by their poverty into the working class community. \{BLANK\} Women were very much a group apart, not going to work, their whole life spent bringing up a large family.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 1. Can you remember being br
ought up to treat people of one sort differently from people of another? Were you ever told to curtsey, touch your cap; show respect in some way? To whom? Was there anyone you called 'sir' or 'master or 'madam'? Do you remember anyone showing respect to y
our parents in these ways?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No. Where he lived, everyone was poor and working class. Hardly in contact with the rich - they were in another world. If there was a meeting, there was no special mark of respect, because they were Not (the rich) a concern i
n their everyday working lives. Parents were respected and obeyed, but no special terms of respect (he called his father, who brought up the family after his mother's deat}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid7602635\charrsid3281826 h}{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 
\ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826  'pp')
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 m. In your district of London who were considered the most important peo
ple? Did you come into contact with them? Why were they considered important?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
Here again, important people rarely cut across their life. Doctors had to be paid and so most people 'doctored themselves'. Although the church was more important then, he n
ever came into contact with clegymen. Therefore the idea of 'important people' never seems to have concerned them. Mr. Mennie added that their main concern was earning their bread.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Where you lived, did all the people in the working class have the same standard of living, or would you say there were different groups?

\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 
No real distinction at all. One single community with no rigid barriers. The shopkeepers were slightly better off, but they were not apart as a distinct group. No one was really out to better himself.
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid5251090 I  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 Do you remember anyone being described as a real gentleman?
\par }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid2640945 M  : }{\rtlch\fcs1 \af0 \ltrch\fcs0 \insrsid4152482\charrsid3281826 No.
\par }}